23469862
Basophil activation test with indomethacin to assess hypersensitivity to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: a preliminary study.
Calamita Zamir, da Silveira Antunes Roseli Nunes, Calamita Andrea Bronhara Pelá, Júnior Wilson Baleotti, Cavaretto Débora de Aguiar, Fukazawa Josianne Thomazini, Filho Odilon Marques de Almeida
Inflammation & allergy drug targets
Background: The basophil activation test has been investigated for diagnosing hypersensitivity to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). This has not yet been done in relation to indomethacin. Objective: First seek to establish the viable concentrations of indomethacin and the diluent propylene glycol (PPG) in relation to basophils then test this in patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs. Materials & Methods: The ideal concentrations of PPG and indomethacin were assessed by incubating them with basophils from an atopic donor and evaluating the intensity of expression of CD63 molecules by means of flow cytometry. We also evaluated the cell viability directly using the trypan blue in seven controls. Then indomethacin was tested in ten patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs compared with eight persons in control group. Results: In relation to the toxicity of propylene glycol, concentrations less than or equal to 0.5% are safe. There was no cytotoxicity or nonspecific stimulation from using indomethacin at concentrations of 10 mcg/mL, 1 mcg/mL and 0.1 mcg/mL. Then indomethacin was tested at concentration of 10 mcg / mL diluted in 0.5% propylene glycol in both groups. There was no statistical difference in the intensity of activation of basophils compared the group of patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs and the control group. Conclusions: As a diluent for indomethacin, PPG should be used at concentrations less than or equal to 0.5%. The indomethacin at concentration of 10 mcg / mL was not able to differentiate patients with and without hypersensitivity to NSAIDs. 23450838
Basophilic histamine content and release during venom immunotherapy: Insights by flow cytometry.
Nullens S, Sabato V, Faber M, Leysen J, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Falcone F H, Maurer M, Ebo D G
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
BACKGROUND: Despite the efficiency of venom immunotherapy, the effects on basophils and mast cells remain incompletely understood and probably vary according to the treatment phase. OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of build-up and maintenance venom immunotherapy on individual basophils. METHODS: Intracellular histamine and its release was analyzed flow cytometrically by a new enzyme-affinity method using diamine oxidase conjugated to laser-excitable fluorochromes. Phenotyping of cells included flow cytometric quantification of CD63 and CD203c. Analyses of basophil activation experiments were performed before the start of treatment, after build-up therapy and during maintenance therapy. RESULTS: Before the start of therapy, patients demonstrated significantly higher numbers of basophils when compared with stung control individuals. At the end of build-up therapy a decrease of basophil numbers was observed, whereas during maintenance therapy basophil counts returned to pretreatment values. Before the start of therapy, the intracellular histamine content per cell in patients was significantly higher when compared with stung control individuals. During maintenance therapy intracellular histamine content decreased to values observed in stung control individuals. In addition, maintenance therapy lowered the net release of histamine per cell in response to optimal stimulation with wasp venom. CONCLUSIONS: We introduce a novel technique that enables to assess the effects of venom immunotherapy on basophils. This new technique may help to monitor treatment effects in individual patients and could aid in the development of more efficient and better tolerated immunotherapy protocols. © 2013 International Clinical Cytometry Society.
Copyright © 2013 International Clinical Cytometry Society.23402739
Detection of exosomal biomarker by electric field-induced release and measurement (EFIRM).
Wei Fang, Yang Jieping, Wong David T W
Biosensors & bioelectronics
Exosomes biomarkers mediating important biological process, especially in the systemic disease diagnostics and therapeutics, yet the protective exosomal vesicle structure hinders rapid, simple detection of the harbored molecules. We have established a new method, the electric field-induced release and measurement (EFIRM), which can simultaneously disrupt exosomes to release the contents and on-site monitoring the harbored exosomal RNA/proteins biomarkers. When exposed to a non-uniform electrical field, exosomal RNA and proteins are rapidly released. Bio-recognition of these biomolecules is carried out concurrently. We tested the hypothesis that the lung cancer cell line, H460 stably transfected with hCD63-GFP, would shed hCD63-GFP expressing exosomes that could be detected in serum and saliva. We confirmed in vivo that H460-CD63-GFP shed exosomes were transported to blood and saliva. This result demonstrates for the first time tumor-shed exosomes were detected in saliva, in addition to blood, presenting a new translational utility of exosome-based biomarker detection in saliva.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.23386062
Rac and Rab GTPases dual effector Nischarin regulates vesicle maturation to facilitate survival of intracellular bacteria.
Kuijl Coenraad, Pilli Manohar, Alahari Suresh K, Janssen Hans, Khoo Poh-Sim, Ervin Karen E, Calero Monica, Jonnalagadda Sobhanaditya, Scheller Richard H, Neefjes Jacques, Junutula Jagath R
The EMBO journal
The intracellular pathogenic bacterium Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium (Salmonella) relies on acidification of the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV) for survival inside host cells. The transport and fusion of membrane-bound compartments in a cell is regulated by small GTPases, including Rac and members of the Rab GTPase family, and their effector proteins. However, the role of these components in survival of intracellular pathogens is not completely understood. Here, we identify Nischarin as a novel dual effector that can interact with members of Rac and Rab GTPase (Rab4, Rab14 and Rab9) families at different endosomal compartments. Nischarin interacts with GTP-bound Rab14 and PI(3)P to direct the maturation of early endosomes to Rab9/CD63-containing late endosomes. Nischarin is recruited to the SCV in a Rab14-dependent manner and enhances acidification of the SCV. Depletion of Nischarin or the Nischarin binding partners-Rac1, Rab14 and Rab9 GTPases-reduced the intracellular growth of Salmonella. Thus, interaction of Nischarin with GTPases may regulate maturation and subsequent acidification of vacuoles produced after phagocytosis of pathogens.23382959
Basolateral Invasion and Trafficking of Campylobacter jejuni in Polarized Epithelial Cells.
Bouwman Lieneke I, Niewold Paula, van Putten Jos P M
PloS one
Campylobacter jejuni is a major cause of bacterial diarrheal disease. Most enteropathogenic bacteria including C. jejuni can invade cultured eukaryotic cells via an actin- and/or microtubule-dependent and an energy-consuming uptake process. Recently, we identified a novel highly efficient C. jejuni invasion pathway that involves bacterial migration into the subcellular space of non-polarized epithelial cells (termed subvasion) followed by invasion from the cell basis. Here we report cellular requirements of this entry mechanism and the subsequent intracellular trafficking route of C. jejuni in polarized islands of Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells. Advanced microscopy on infected cells revealed that C. jejuni invades the polarized intestinal cells via the subcellular invasion pathway. Remarkably, invasion was not blocked by the inhibitors of microtubule dynamics colchicine or paclitaxel, and was even enhanced after disruption of host cell actin filaments by cytochalasin D. Invasion also continued after dinitrophenol-induced cellular depletion of ATP, whereas this compound effectively inhibited the uptake of invasive Escherichia coli. Confocal microscopy demonstrated that intracellular C. jejuni resided in membrane-bound CD63-positive cellular compartments for up to 24 h. Establishment of a novel luciferase reporter-based bacterial viability assay, developed to overcome the limitations of the classical bacterial recovery assay, demonstrated that a subset of C. jejuni survived intracellularly for up to 48 h. Taken together, our results indicate that C. jejuni is able to actively invade polarized intestinal epithelial cells via a novel actin- and microtubule-independent mechanism and remains metabolically active in the intracellular niche for up to 48 hours.23358892
Bacterial colonization of host cells in the absence of cholesterol.
Gilk Stacey D, Cockrell Diane C, Luterbach Courtney, Hansen Bryan, Knodler Leigh A, Ibarra J Antonio, Steele-Mortimer Olivia, Heinzen Robert A
PLoS pathogens
Reports implicating important roles for cholesterol and cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in host-pathogen interactions have largely employed sterol sequestering agents and biosynthesis inhibitors. Because the pleiotropic effects of these compounds can complicate experimental interpretation, we developed a new model system to investigate cholesterol requirements in pathogen infection utilizing DHCR24(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). DHCR24(-/-) MEFs lack the Δ24 sterol reductase required for the final enzymatic step in cholesterol biosynthesis, and consequently accumulate desmosterol into cellular membranes. Defective lipid raft function by DHCR24(-/-) MEFs adapted to growth in cholesterol-free medium was confirmed by showing deficient uptake of cholera-toxin B and impaired signaling by epidermal growth factor. Infection in the absence of cholesterol was then investigated for three intracellular bacterial pathogens: Coxiella burnetii, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, and Chlamydia trachomatis. Invasion by S. Typhimurium and C. trachomatis was unaltered in DHCR24(-/-) MEFs. In contrast, C. burnetii entry was significantly decreased in -cholesterol MEFs, and also in +cholesterol MEFs when lipid raft-associated α(V)β(3) integrin was blocked, suggesting a role for lipid rafts in C. burnetii uptake. Once internalized, all three pathogens established their respective vacuolar niches and replicated normally. However, the C. burnetii-occupied vacuole within DHCR24(-/-) MEFs lacked the CD63-positive material and multilamellar membranes typical of vacuoles formed in wild type cells, indicating cholesterol functions in trafficking of multivesicular bodies to the pathogen vacuole. These data demonstrate that cholesterol is not essential for invasion and intracellular replication by S. Typhimurium and C. trachomatis, but plays a role in C. burnetii-host cell interactions.23355309
IgE-mediated allergy to pholcodine and cross-reactivity to neuromuscular blocking agents: Lessons from flow cytometry.
Leysen J, De Witte L, Sabato V, Faber M, Hagendorens M, Bridts C, De Clerck L, Ebo D
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Immunoglubulin E antibody-mediated allergic reactions to opioids are rare and difficult to document correctly.
Assessment of the basophil activation test in the diagnosis of IgE-mediated allergy to the antitussive pholcodine and associated sensitizations to neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA).
Three patients with a suspected IgE-mediated allergy to pholcodine were investigated using skin tests, quantification of specific IgE, and flow cytometric activation of basophils.
Flow cytometric activation of basophils, with simultaneous analysis of CD63 appearance and median histamine content per cell, is the only technique capable to correctly document pholcodine allergy. The negative predictive value of basophil activation tests might help to elucidate on the controversial putative cross-reactivity between pholcodine and NMBA. © 2013 International Clinical Cytometry Society.
Copyright © 2013 International Clinical Cytometry Society.23320994
Flow cytometric comparison of platelets from a whole blood and finger-prick sample: impact of 24 hours storage.
Swanepoel Albe C, Stander Andre, Pretorius Etheresia
Hematology (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
In this study, we investigate the validity and laboratory utility of flow cytometry when analyzing platelet activation by studying CD41, CD42b, CD62P and CD63. We compare flow cytometry results from citrated whole-blood and finger-prick samples directly after collection and also after storing both a finger-prick and whole-blood sample for 24 hours. Citrated whole-blood and finger-prick samples were taken from three healthy individuals on two occasions, and a total of 60 000 cells were analyzed for each of the four phycoerythrin-labeled monoclonal antibodies. Half of each sample was analyzed immediately after sampling while the other half was kept in the fridge at 6°C for 24 hours before analysis. No significant difference was found between the sampling methods or the period of time before analysis. Results therefore suggest that an appropriately prepared finger-prick sample can be used for platelet function analysis, and samples can be stored for 24 hours in the fridge at 6°C before analysis.23318173
Cardiac progenitor-derived exosomes protect ischemic myocardium from acute ischemia/reperfusion injury.
Chen Lijuan, Wang Yingjie, Pan Yaohua, Zhang Lan, Shen Chengxing, Qin Gangjian, Ashraf Muhammad, Weintraub Neal, Ma Genshan, Tang Yaoliang
Biochemical and biophysical research communications
Cardiac progenitors (CPC) mediate cardioprotection via paracrine effects. To date, most of studies focused on secreted paracrine proteins. Here we investigated the CPC-derived-exosomes on protecting myocardium from acute ischemia/reperfusion (MI/R) injury.
CPC were isolated from mouse heart using two-step protocol. Exosomes were purified from conditional medium, and confirmed by electron micrograph and Western blot using CD63 as a marker. qRT-PCR shows that CPC-exosomes have high level expression of GATA4-responsive-miR-451. Exosomes were ex vivo labeled with PKH26, We observed exosomes can be uptaken by H9C2 cardiomyoblasts with high efficiency after 12h incubation. CPC-exosomes protect H9C2 from oxidative stress by inhibiting caspase 3/7 activation invitro. In vivo delivery of CPC-exosomes in an acute mouse myocardial ischemia/reperfusion model inhibited cardiomyocyte apoptosis by about 53% in comparison with PBS control (p<0.05).
Our results suggest, for the first time, the CPC-exosomes can be used as a therapeutic vehicle for cardioprotection, and highlights a new perspective for using non-cell exosomes for cardiac disease.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.23299716
Immune-modulatory effect of probiotic Bifidobacterium lactis NCC2818 in individuals suffering from seasonal allergic rhinitis to grass pollen: an exploratory, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Singh A, Hacini-Rachinel F, Gosoniu M L, Bourdeau T, Holvoet S, Doucet-Ladeveze R, Beaumont M, Mercenier A, Nutten S
European journal of clinical nutrition
Background/Objectives:Probiotics are defined as 'living micro-organisms that when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit to the host'. Different probiotic strains have been investigated for beneficial effects on allergic disorders. The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the effect of orally administering the probiotic Nestlé culture collection (NCC)2818 Bifidobacterium lactis strain on immune parameters and nasal symptom scores in subjects suffering from seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR).Subjects/Methods:The study was a double-blinded, parallel, randomized placebo-controlled trial conducted during the peak of the pollen season. Adult subjects with clinical history of SAR and positive skin prick test to grass pollen were recruited. The subjects received B. lactis NCC2818 or placebo for 8 weeks and completed symptom questionnaires every week. Whole blood was collected at baseline (V1), 4 weeks (V2) and 8 weeks (V3) to measure immune parameters.Results:Concentrations of Th-2 cytokines, secreted by stimulated blood lymphocytes, were significantly lower in the probiotic group compared with the placebo group at V3 (interleukin (IL)-5, P=0.016; IL-13, P=0.005). Total nasal symptom scores were significantly lower in the second month of the study (weeks 5-8) in the probiotic group compared with the placebo group (P=0.03). Also, percentages of activated CD63 expressing basophils were significantly lower in the probiotic group at V2 (P=0.02).Conclusions:Oral administration of the probiotic NCC2818 mitigates immune parameters and allergic symptoms during seasonal exposure. These promising results warrant that B. lactis NCC2818 be investigated further in large-scale trials for management of respiratory allergy.23298505
CD63 cell expression detected by flow-cytometric determination of basophil activation in allergic patients.
Tammaro A, Narcisi A, Amodeo R, Portaro L, Tabacco F, Cardelli P, Persechino S
International journal of immunopathology and pharmacology
Flow cytometry analysis of in vitro activated basophils (BATs) based on the detection of CD63 up-regulation on basophil membrane provides the physician and the clinical laboratory with a novel diagnostic approach, proposed as a promising alternative method for in vitro diagnosis of IgE and non-mediated reactions. We performed an optimized flow cytometric procedure to assess CD63 expression on activated basophils on twenty allergic patients, and compared the results with specific IgE determination (RAST) and skin testing (Prick test).23294195
Mast Cell FcϵRI Density and Function Dissociate from Dependence on Soluble IgE Concentration at Very Low and Very High IgE Concentrations.
Krohn Inge Kortekaas, Lund Gitte, Frandsen Pernille Munk, Schiøtz Peter Oluf, Dahl Ronald, Hoffmann Hans Jürgen
The Journal of asthma : official journal of the Association for the Care of Asthma
Objective. The contribution of affinity, clonality, and concentration of individual IgE species to effector cell response has recently been characterized in a model with recombinant human IgE on passively sensitized basophils. This study extends the dependence of effector cell degranulation on IgE concentration to mast cells cultured with IgE for 2 weeks. Methods. Human mast cells cultured for 7 weeks from peripheral blood stem cells were matured for 2 weeks with interleukin-4 (IL-4) and recombinant human IgE consisting of two clones specific for Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 2 (Derp2) (7% + 7%) and unspecific IgE at 0.8, 8, 80, and 800 kU/L. The density of the IgE receptor, FcϵRI, and mast cell function were measured after challenging with recombinant Derp2 at 14 concentrations from 10 fg/mL to 100 pg/mL. CD63 expression, histamine release, and Prostaglandin D2 (PGD(2)) synthesis were measured, and maximal expression and mast cell sensitivity were calculated. Results. At 800 kU/L IgE, FcϵRI expression varied more than at 80, 8, and 0.8 kU/L IgE. There was a trend toward increased maximal expression of CD63, histamine release, and PGD(2) secretion with increasing IgE concentration. At 0.1 kU/L specific IgE, the LC50 increased up to fivefold, least so for PGD(2). Conclusions. Human mast cells cultured with rhIgE of known composition are a sensitive model for studying factors governing effector cell degranulation that is close to the in vivo situation. This model can be used to study effects of IgE concentration, clonality, and affinity and may help predict the optimal immunologic treatment for a given patient.23289620
Tetraspanin protein CD9 interacts with metalloprotease CD10 and enhances its release via exosomes.
Mazurov Dmitriy, Barbashova Lubov, Filatov Alexander
The FEBS journal
Tetraspanins interact with a wide variety of transmembrane and intracellular proteins called molecular partners, and modulate their function. In this article, we describe a new partner of tetraspanin web, membrane metalloprotease CD10, which is selectively associated with CD9. By constructing chimeras between tetraspanins CD9 and CD82 (the latter does not interact with CD10) or by using site-directed mutagenesis, we determined that a portion of the large extracellular loop from the CCG motif to transmembrane domain 4, as well as the C-terminal tail of CD9, are involved in the interaction with CD10. The stable expression of wild-type CD9 in K562 CD10-positive cells enhanced the level of CD10 released with exosomes five-fold. In contrast, the expression of chimeric CD9, which contained the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain from CD82, had little effect on CD10 release. Short hairpin RNA knockdown of CD9 expression in Nalm-6 pre-B cells resulted in a two-fold reduction in the amount of endogenous CD10 released with microvesicles. The peptidase activity of CD10 measured either on cells or on exosomes correlated with the level of CD10 expression, and was not significantly modulated by CD9 expression as such. Our data suggest that the interaction of CD10 with tetraspanin CD9 can play an important role in the redistribution of peptidase activity from the cell surface to outer microenvironments. In bone marrow, where CD10 presumably contributes to the maturation of pre-B cells and migration of B cells to the blood circulation, release of CD10 peptidase activity with exosomes may effectively regulate extracellular matrix microenvironments. STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT: CD9 physically interacts with CD179b, Tetraspanin-9, CD63, CD81, HLA class II, Uncharacterized protein C14orf166B, Tetraspanin-14, HLA class I, Galactokinase, Protein disulfide-isomerase A6, CD98, CD19, CD316, CD146, CD92, Annexin A6, CD156c, CD71, CD10, CD29, CD315, DAAM1 and CD49f by anti bait coimmunoprecipitation (View interaction) CD10 physically interacts with CD9 by anti bait coimmunoprecipitation (View Interaction: 1, 2, 3, 4) CD10 physically interacts with CD179b, Protein FAM207A, CD9, CD81, Uncharacterized protein C22orf13, HLA class II, Uncharacterized protein C3orf26, HLA class I, Protein C14orf21, Annexin A6 and DAAM1 by anti bait coimmunoprecipitation (View interaction).
© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.23278880
Heterogeneity in the responses of human lung mast cells to stem cell factor.
Lewis A, Wan J, Baothman B, Monk P N, Suvarna S K, Peachell P T
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Stem cell factor (SCF) is a growth factor that is involved in mast cell differentiation and proliferation. SCF primes human lung mast cells for enhanced responses to IgE-directed activation but is not generally recognized as a direct activator. SCF mediates its effects through c-kit.
The aim of this study was to reappraise the effects of SCF on human lung mast cells.
Mast cells were isolated from human lung. Mast cells were challenged with anti-IgE or SCF and the generation of histamine, cysteinyl-leukotrienes (cys-LTs) and prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2) ) was assessed as was expression of the activation marker, CD63. The effects of c-kit inhibitors on mediator release were evaluated.
Stem cell factor (10 ng/mL) alone was unable to induce mediator release but primed mast cells for enhanced IgE-dependent secretion. At higher concentrations (≥ 30 ng/mL), SCF had more varied effects and even when used alone was able to drive substantial levels of histamine release in about a third of all preparations studied. Similarly, SCF (100 ng/mL) alone was effective in stimulating the generation of cys-LTs in half of the preparations studied. SCF (100 ng/mL) was even more effective at stimulating PGD(2) generation as almost all preparations generated substantial quantities of the prostanoid. Mediator release induced by SCF was accompanied by the up-regulation of the activation marker, CD63. There was a positive correlation between the extent of mediator release induced by SCF and c-kit receptor expression. The effects of SCF on mediator release from mast cells were reversed by the c-kit inhibitor imatinib.
These data demonstrate that the responses of mast cells to SCF are heterogeneous. SCF can drive much greater levels of mediator release from mast cells, especially of PGD(2), than hitherto appreciated and this could be important in the context of respiratory diseases.
© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.23241026
Extracellular amastigotes of Trypanosoma cruzi are potent inducers of phagocytosis in mammalian cells.
Fernandes Maria Cecilia, Flannery Andrew R, Andrews Norma, Mortara Renato A
Cellular microbiology
The protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi, the aetiological agent of Chagas' disease, has two infective life cycle stages, trypomastigotes and amastigotes. While trypomastigotes actively enter mammalian cells, highly infective extracellular amastigotes (type I T. cruzi) rely on actin-mediated uptake, which is generally inefficient in non-professional phagocytes. We found that extracellular amastigotes (EAs) of T. cruzi G strain (type I), but not Y strain (type II), were taken up 100-fold more efficiently than inert particles. Mammalian cell lines showed levels of parasite uptake comparable to macrophages, and extensive actin recruitment and polymerization was observed at the site of entry. EA uptake was not dependent on parasite-secreted molecules and required the same molecular machinery utilized by professional phagocytes during large particle phagocytosis. Transcriptional silencing of synaptotagmin VII and CD63 significantly inhibited EA internalization, demonstrating that delivery of supplemental lysosomal membrane to form the phagosome is involved in parasite uptake. Importantly, time-lapse live imaging using fluorescent reporters revealed phagosome-associated modulation of phosphoinositide metabolism during EA uptake that closely resembles what occurs during phagocytosis by macrophages. Collectively, our results demonstrate that T. cruzi EAs are potent inducers of phagocytosis in non-professional phagocytes, a process that may facilitate parasite persistence in infected hosts.
© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.23230278
Two Distinct Populations of Exosomes Are Released from LIM1863 Colon Carcinoma Cell-derived Organoids.
Tauro Bow J, Greening David W, Mathias Rommel A, Mathivanan Suresh, Ji Hong, Simpson Richard J
Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP
Exosomes are naturally occurring biological nanomembranous vesicles (∼40 to 100 nm) of endocytic origin that are released from diverse cell types into the extracellular space. They have pleiotropic functions such as antigen presentation and intercellular transfer of protein cargo, mRNA, microRNA, lipids, and oncogenic potential. Here we describe the isolation, via sequential immunocapture using anti-A33- and anti-EpCAM-coupled magnetic beads, of two distinct populations of exosomes released from organoids derived from human colon carcinoma cell line LIM1863. The exosome populations (A33-Exos and EpCAM-Exos) could not be distinguished via electron microscopy and contained stereotypical exosome markers such as TSG101, Alix, and HSP70. The salient finding of this study, revealed via gel-based LC-MS/MS, was the exclusive identification in EpCAM-Exos of the classical apical trafficking molecules CD63 (LAMP3), mucin 13 and the apical intestinal enzyme sucrase isomaltase and increased expression of dipeptidyl peptidase IV and the apically restricted pentaspan membrane glycoprotein prominin 1. In contrast, the A33-Exos preparation was enriched with basolateral trafficking molecules such as early endosome antigen 1, the Golgi membrane protein ADP-ribosylation factor, and clathrin. Our observations are consistent with EpCAM- and A33-Exos being released from the apical and basolateral surfaces, respectively, and the EpCAM-Exos proteome profile with widely published stereotypical exosomes. A proteome analysis of LIM1863-derived shed microvesicles (sMVs) was also performed in order to clearly distinguish A33- and EpCAM-Exos from sMVs. Intriguingly, several members of the MHC class I family of antigen presentation molecules were exclusively observed in A33-Exos, whereas neither MHC class I nor MHC class II molecules were observed via MS in EpCAM-Exos. Additionally, we report for the first time in any extracellular vesicle study the colocalization of EpCAM, claudin-7, and CD44 in EpCAM-Exos. Given that these molecules are known to complex together to promote tumor progression, further characterization of exosome subpopulations will enable a deeper understanding of their possible role in regulation of the tumor microenvironment.23215637
Novel mutation in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 with mild immunological phenotype.
Kurnik Karin, Bartsch Ingrid, Maul-Pavicic Andrea, Ehl Stephan, Sandrock-Lang Kirstin, Bidlingmaier Christoph, Rombach Nina, Busse Anja, Belohradsky Bernd H, Müller-Höcker Josef, Aslanidis Charalampos, Schmitz Gerd, Zieger Barbara
Platelets
Patients with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS2) present with oculocutaneous albinism, nystagmus, prolonged bleeding time, and increased susceptibility to infections. Twelve HPS2 patients with mutations in the β3A-subunit of the cytosolic adaptor-related protein complex 3 (AP3B1, also called HPS2) have been described so far. Here, we report on a patient with oculocutaneous albinism who developed a life-threatening bleeding after tonsillectomy. She presented with moderate neutropenia and reduced granulopoiesis. Analyzing patient's impaired platelet function using electron microscopy and flow cytometry led to the diagnosis of HPS2. Flow cytometric analysis of the patient's platelets showed already elevated CD63 expression on resting platelets with no further increase after thrombin stimulation. Natural killer (NK) cell degranulation was partially impaired but target cell lysis of NK cells and cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs) were normal and the patient did not develop signs of hemophagocytic syndrome. Molecular genetic analyses revealed a novel 2 bp-deletion (c.3222_3223delTG) in the last exon of AP3B1 causing a frameshift and a prolonged altered protein. The location of the deletion at the very C-terminal end may prevent a complete loss of the HPS2 protein leading to a less pronounced severity of immunodeficiency than in other HPS2 patients.23206207
Platelets express and release osteocalcin and co-localize in human calcified atherosclerotic plaques.
Foresta C, Strapazzon G, DE Toni L, Fabris F, Grego F, Gerosa G, Vettore S, Garolla A
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
Summary.  Background:  Although vascular-calcification mechanisms are only partially understood, the role of circulating calcifying cells and non-collagenous bone matrix proteins in the bone-vascular axis is emerging. In spite of the fact that platelets represent a cellular interface between hemostasis, inflammation and atherosclerosis, and have a myeloid precursor, a possible involvement in the modulation of vascular calcification has rarely been investigated. We investigated if osteocalcin (OC) is released by platelets and described OC expression in patients with carotid artery occlusive disease. Methods:  Expression and release of OC were determined by Western blot, immunofluorescence, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and ELISA in human resting and activated platelets and megakaryocytes. Co-localization of platelet aggregates, macrophages, OC and calcifications was studied in carotid endarterectomy specimens and normal tissues. Results:  Human platelets expressed OC and co-localized with CD63 in δ-granules. Upon activation with an endogenous mechanism, platelets released OC in the extracellular medium. Expression of OC in megakaryocytes suggested lineage specificity. The OC count in circulating platelets and the released amount were significantly higher in patients with carotid artery occlusive disease than in healthy controls (P < 0.0001) in spite of similar serum levels. In atherosclerotic plaques, OC strongly overlapped with CD41+ platelets in the early stage of calcification, but this was not seen in normal tissues. CD68+OC+ cells were present at the periphery of the calcified zone. Conclusions:  Given the active role played by platelets in the atherosclerotic process, the involvement of OC release from platelets in atherosclerotic lesions and the impact of genetic and cardiovascular risk factors in mediating bone-marrow preconditioning should be investigated further.
© 2012 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.23188565
Update on the performance and application of basophil activation tests.
McGowan Emily C, Saini Sarbjit
Current allergy and asthma reports
The basophil activation test (BAT) is a flow-cytometry-based functional assay that assesses the degree of cell activation after exposure to a stimuli. Though no standardized technique currently exists, recent advances have improved the performance of this assay, including identification of new basophil-specific markers and comparisons of the expression of CD63 to CD203c during activation. The basophil activation test has also been validated for many IgE-mediated disease conditions, which have been extensively reviewed elsewhere. This review focuses on the most recent applications of this test to the diagnosis of allergy to drugs, foods, venoms, and pollens, and the evolving role of the BAT in monitoring immunotherapy.23183757
A comparison between two different in vitro basophil activation tests for gluten- and cow's milk protein sensitivity in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-like patients.
Carroccio Antonio, Brusca Ignazio, Mansueto Pasquale, D'alcamo Alberto, Barrale Maria, Soresi Maurizio, Seidita Aurelio, La Chiusa Stella M, Iacono Giuseppe, Sprini Delia
Clinical chemistry and laboratory medicine : CCLM / FESCC
Abstract Background: The diagnosis of food hypersensitivity (FH) in adult patients with gastrointestinal symptoms, beyond the immediate IgE-mediated clinical manifestations, is very often difficult. The aims of our study were to: 1) evaluate the frequency of FH in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-like clinical presentation; and 2) compare the diagnostic accuracy of two different methods of in vitro basophil activation tests. Methods: Three hundred and five patients (235 females, age range 18-66 years) were included and underwent a diagnostic elimination diet and successive double-blind placebo-controlled (DBPC) challenges. Two different methods of in vitro basophil activation tests (BAT) (CD63 expression after in vitro wheat or cow's milk proteins stimulation) were evaluated: one was performed on separated leukocytes, and the other on whole blood. Results: Ninety patients of the 305 studied (29.5%) were positive to the challenges and were diagnosed as suffering from FH. BAT on separate leukocytes showed a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 91% in FH diagnosis. BAT on whole blood showed a sensitivity of 15%-20% and a specificity of 73% in FH diagnosis (p<0.0001 compared to the other method). Conclusions: About one third of the IBS patients included in the study were suffering from FH and were cured on the elimination diet. The BAT based on CD63 detection on whole blood samples did not work in FH diagnosis and showed a significantly lower sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic accuracy than the assay based on separated leukocytes.23183487
Oxidative Activity of Ammonium Persulfate Salt on Mast Cells and Basophils: Implication in Hairdressers' Asthma.
Pignatti Patrizia, Frossi Barbara, Pala Gianni, Negri Sara, Oman Hans, Perfetti Luca, Pucillo Carlo, Imbriani Marcello, Moscato Gianna
International archives of allergy and immunology
Background: Persulfate salts are components of bleaching powders widely used by hairdressers during hair-bleaching procedures. Hairdressers are at high risk for occupational asthma and rhinitis, and ammonium persulfate is the main etiologic agent. Objective: To explore the effects of ammonium persulfate on human albumin, mast cells, and basophils in order to evaluate a possible effect of ammonium persulfate oxidizing activity in the mechanism of ammonium persulfate-induced occupational asthma. Methods: High-performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry was performed on ammonium persulfate-incubated human albumin. The activation of LAD2 human mast cell and KU812 human basophil cell lines incubated with ammonium persulfate was evaluated. CD63 expression on persulfate-in-vitro-incubated blood basophils from nonexposed healthy controls (n = 31) and hairdressers with work-related respiratory symptoms (n = 29) was assessed by flow cytometry. Results: No persulfate-albumin conjugate was found. An oxidative process on tryptophan and methionine was detected. Ammonium persulfate induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and the degranulation of LAD2 and KU812 cells. Human basophils from healthy controls, incubated in vitro with ammonium persulfate, showed increased CD63 expression and ROS production. In hairdressers with ammonium persulfate-caused occupational asthma (positive persulfate challenge), basophil-CD63 expression was higher than in those with a negative challenge and in healthy controls. Conclusions: Ammonium persulfate incubated with human albumin did not generate any adduct but oxidized some amino acids. This oxidizing activity induced human mast cell and basophil activation which might be crucial in the mechanism of persulfate-induced occupational asthma and rhinitis.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.23112977
CD45/CD8 Myeloid Histioid Antigen and Plasma Cell Antibody Immune Response in a Case of Malignant Melanoma.
Abreu-Velez Ana Maria, Howard Michael S, Pereyo Neville Y, Delman Keith A, Mihm Martin C, Rizzo Monica
North American journal of medical sciences
The immune response in metastatic melanoma is not well established and therefore is of particular interest to test for recruitment of immune cells to the tumor. A 46-year-old Caucasian female was evaluated for an asymptomatic right forearm mass. The lesion had been present for at least 4 years and had become painful 4 months ago. Biopsies for hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining, as well as immunohistochemical analysis were performed on the primary tumor and on sentinel lymph nodes. The H and E staining was consistent with metastatic melanoma. Positive staining was noted on the tumor cells with S-100, Mart-1/Melan A/CD63, PNL2, HMB45, and tyrosinase. Peritumoral and intratumoral inflammatory cells stained positive for CD8, CD45, PCNA, myeloid histoid antigen, antihuman plasma cell antibody, and focal BRCA1. The staining patterns of CD8/CD45, myeloid histoid antigen and plasma cell antibody on inflammatory cells around the melanoma cells suggest an unusual type of immune response.23109053
The effects of various doses of bacterial lipopolysaccharide on the expression of CD63 and the release of histamine by basophils of atopic and non-atopic patients.
Gyimesi E, Gönczi F, Szilasi M, Pál G, Baráth S, Sipka S
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
We tested the effect of various doses of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) on the expression of CD63 and the in vitro release of histamine by basophils stimulated with ragweed allergen in patients with or without ragweed and mite allergies.
The peripheral blood of 11 patients with ragweed allergy, 10 patients with mite allergy and 14 control patients was incubated with ragweed allergen extract following pretreatment with varying doses of LPS. The expression of CD63 in basophils was measured by flow cytometry, and the release of histamine was determined by ELISA.
In the samples of patients with ragweed allergy that were exposed to specific allergen, only high doses of LPS significantly elevated the expression of CD63 (200 ng/ml; 1,000 EU/ml) and the release of histamine (2,000 ng/ml; 10,000 EU/ml). There was no effect of LPS in any other cases.
Bacterial LPS (endotoxin) concentrations higher than 200 ng/ml (1,000 EU/ml), which rarely occurs in nature, could only activate the basophils from atopic patients whilst in the presence of the specific allergen. Thus, the restoration of the urban, "microbe-poor" milieu with endotoxin (as LPS) can be a promising and harmless approach for allergy prevention.23108090
Human platelets can discriminate between various bacterial LPS isoforms via TLR4 signaling and differential cytokine secretion.
Berthet Julien, Damien Pauline, Hamzeh-Cognasse Hind, Arthaud Charles-Antoine, Eyraud Marie-Ange, Zéni Fabrice, Pozzetto Bruno, McNicol Archibald, Garraud Olivier, Cognasse Fabrice
Clinical immunology (Orlando, Fla.)
Platelets are currently acknowledged as cells of innate immunity and inflammation and play a complex role in sepsis. We examined whether different types of LPS have different effects on the release of soluble signaling/effective molecules from platelets. We used platelet-rich plasma from healthy volunteers and LPS from two strains of gram-negative bacteria with disparate LPS structures. We combined LPS-stimulated platelet supernatants with reporter cells and measured the PBMC cytokine secretion profiles. Upon stimulation of platelets with both Escherichia coli O111 and Salmonella minnesota LPS, the platelet LPS::TLR4 interaction activated pathways to trigger the production of a large number of molecules. The different platelet supernatants caused differential PBMC secretion of IL-6, TNFα, and IL-8. Our data demonstrate that platelets have the capacity to sense external signals differentially through a single type of pathogen recognition receptor and adjust the innate immune response appropriately for pathogens exhibiting different types of 'danger' signals.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.23107341
Immunomodulatory molecules are released from the first trimester and term placenta via exosomes.
Kshirsagar S K, Alam S M, Jasti S, Hodes H, Nauser T, Gilliam M, Billstrand C, Hunt J S, Petroff M G
Placenta
The semiallogenic fetus is tolerated by the maternal immune system through control of innate and adaptive immune responses. Trophoblast cells secrete nanometer scale membranous particles called exosomes, which have been implicated in modulation of the local and systemic maternal immune system. Here we investigate the possibility that exosomes secreted from the first trimester and term placenta carry HLA-G and B7 family immunomodulators. Confocal microscopy of placental sections revealed intracellular co-localization of B7-H1 with CD63, suggesting that B7-H1 associates with subcellular vesicles that give rise to exosomes. First trimester and term placental explants were then cultured for 24 h. B7H-1 (CD274), B7-H3 (CD276) and HLA-G5 were abundant in pelleted supernatants of these cultures that contained microparticles and exosomes; the latter, however, was observed only in first trimester pellets and was nearly undetectable in term explant-derived pellets. Further purification of exosomes by sucrose density fractionation confirmed the association of these proteins specifically with exosomes. Finally, culture of purified trophoblast cells in the presence or absence of EGF suggested that despite the absence of HLA-G5 association with term explant-derived exosomes, it is present in exosomes secreted from mononuclear cytotrophoblast cells. Further, differentiation of cytotrophoblast cells reduced the presence of HLA-G5 in secreted exosomes. Together, the results suggest that the immunomodulatory proteins HLA-G5, B7-H1 and B7-H3, are secreted from early and term placenta, and have important implications in the mechanisms by which trophoblast immunomodulators modify the maternal immunological environment.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.23092844
Monitoring the Rab27 associated exosome pathway using nanoparticle tracking analysis.
Zheng Ying, Campbell Elaine C, Lucocq John, Riches Andrew, Powis Simon J
Experimental cell research
Exosomes are secreted by many cell types and display multiple biological functions. The ability to both rapidly detect and quantify exosomes in biological samples would assist in the screening of agents that interfere with their release, and which may therefore be of clinical relevance. Nanoparticle tracking analysis, which detects the size and concentration of exosomes, was used to monitor the inhibition of exosome secretion from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells expressing inhibitory RNA targeted for Rab27a, a known component of the exosome pathway. Inhibition of both Rab27a and Rab27b was observed, resulting in alterations to intracellular CD63+ compartments and the release of fewer exosomes into the culture medium, as determined by nanoparticle tracking analysis and confirmed by immunoblotting and protein quantification. These data show that nanoparticle tracking analysis can be used effectively and rapidly to monitor the disruption of exosome secretion.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.23085511
Mechanism of TNF-α autocrine effects in hypoxic cardiomyocytes: initiated by hypoxia inducible factor 1α, presented by exosomes.
Yu Xian, Deng Lingyan, Wang Dan, Li Na, Chen Xiao, Cheng Xiang, Yuan Jin, Gao Xingli, Liao Mengyang, Wang Min, Liao Yuhua
Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology
Excessive tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) expression is increasingly thought to be detrimental to cardiomyocytes in acute myocardial infarction. During myocardial ischemia, TNF-α is mainly released from macrophages, but with persistent ischemia, it can originate from cardiomyocytes and contribute to cardiac remodeling. The initiating factor and exact molecular mechanism of TNF-α release from cardiomyocytes is presently unclear. In this study, we investigated direct effects of hypoxia on TNF-α expression of cardiomyocytes, the role of hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) in TNF-α regulation and potential secretory pathway of TNF-α. Elevated TNF-α expression and HIF-1α activation in primary cultured cardiomyocytes under hypoxia were detected by real-time PCR, Western blotting and immunofluorescence. TNF-α mRNA elevation and protein secretion were obviously inhibited by nucleofection of HIF-1α small interfering RNA (siRNA) and treatment with 2-methoxyestradiol (inhibitor of HIF-1α protein). Similar results were observed in HEK293 and HepG2 cells. Putative hypoxia response elements were identified in the human TNF-α gene promoter. Deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that HIF consensus binding sites spanning bp-1295 to bp-1292 relative to the transcription start site were functional for activation of the TNF-α promoter which was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis. Exosomes (vesicles mediating a non-classical route of protein secretion) in supernatants from hypoxic cardiomyocytes were identified by an anti-CD63 antibody in Western blot and observed by electron microscopy. The presence of TNF-α within exosomes precipitated from supernatants of hypoxic cardiomyocytes was verified by immunoelectron microscopy and immunoblotting. Results of this study indicate that under hypoxia, HIF-1α initiates expression of TNF-α, mediated by exosomes in cardiomyocytes.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.23044750
Adaptor protein complex 2-mediated, clathrin-dependent endocytosis, and related gene activities, are a prominent feature during maturation stage amelogenesis.
Lacruz Rodrigo S, Brookes Steven J, Wen Xin, Jimenez Jaime M, Vikman Susanna, Hu Ping, White Shane N, Lyngstadaas S Petter, Okamoto Curtis T, Smith Charles E, Paine Michael L
Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research
Molecular events defining enamel matrix removal during amelogenesis are poorly understood. Early reports have suggested that adaptor proteins (AP) participate in ameloblast-mediated endocytosis. Enamel formation involves the secretory and maturation stages, with an increase in resorptive function during the latter. Here, using real-time PCR, we show that the expression of clathrin and adaptor protein subunits are upregulated in maturation stage rodent enamel organ cells. AP complex 2 (AP-2) is the most upregulated of the four distinct adaptor protein complexes. Immunolocalization confirms the presence of AP-2 and clathrin in ameloblasts, with strongest reactivity at the apical pole. These data suggest that the resorptive functions of enamel cells involve AP-2 mediated, clathrin-dependent endocytosis, thus implying the likelihood of specific membrane-bound receptor(s) of enamel matrix protein debris. The mRNA expression of other endocytosis-related gene products is also upregulated during maturation including: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (Lamp1); cluster of differentiation 63 and 68 (Cd63 and Cd68); ATPase, H(+) transporting, lysosomal V0 subunit D2 (Atp6v0d2); ATPase, H(+) transporting, lysosomal V1 subunit B2 (Atp6v1b2); chloride channel, voltage-sensitive 7 (Clcn7); and cathepsin K (Ctsk). Immunohistologic data confirms the expression of a number of these proteins in maturation stage ameloblasts. The enamel of Cd63-null mice was also examined. Despite increased mRNA and protein expression in the enamel organ during maturation, the enamel of Cd63-null mice appeared normal. This may suggest inherent functional redundancies between Cd63 and related gene products, such as Lamp1 and Cd68. Ameloblast-like LS8 cells treated with the enamel matrix protein complex Emdogain showed upregulation of AP-2 and clathrin subunits, further supporting the existence of a membrane-bound receptor-regulated pathway for the endocytosis of enamel matrix proteins. These data together define an endocytotic pathway likely used by ameloblasts to remove the enamel matrix during enamel maturation. © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.23010472
NPC1 defect results in abnormal platelet formation and function: studies in Niemann-Pick disease type C1 patients and zebrafish.
Louwette Sophie, Régal Luc, Wittevrongel Christine, Thys Chantal, Vandeweeghde Gwenny, Decuyper Elisa, Leemans Peter, De Vos Rita, Van Geet Chris, Jaeken Jaak, Freson Kathleen
Human molecular genetics
Niemann-Pick type C is a lysosomal storage disease associated with mutations in NPC1 or NPC2, resulting in an accumulation of cholesterol in the endosomal-lysosomal system. Niemann-Pick type C has a clinical spectrum that ranges from a neonatal rapidly fatal disorder to an adult-onset chronic neurodegenerative disease combined with remarkably, in some cases, hematological defects such as thrombocytopenia, anemia and petechial rash. A role of NPC1 in hematopoiesis was never shown. Here, we describe platelet function abnormalities in three unrelated patients with a proven genetic and biochemical NPC1 defect. Their platelets have reduced aggregations, P-selectin expression and ATP secretions that are compatible with the observed abnormal alpha and reduced dense granules as studied by electron microscopy and CD63 staining after platelet spreading. Their blood counts were normal. NPC1 expression was shown in platelets and megakaryocytes (MKs). In vitro differentiated MKs from NPC1 patients exhibit hyperproliferation of immature MKs with different CD63(+) granules and abnormal cellular accumulation of cholesterol as shown by filipin stainings. The role of NPC1 in megakaryopoiesis was further studied using zebrafish with GFP-labeled thrombocytes or DsRed-labeled erythrocytes. NPC1 depletion in zebrafish resulted in increased cell death in the brain and abnormal cellular accumulation of filipin. NPC1-depleted embryos presented with thrombocytopenia and mild anemia as studied by flow cytometry and real-time QPCR for specific blood cell markers. In conclusion, this is the first report, showing a role of NPC1 in platelet function and formation but further studies are needed to define how cholesterol storage interferes with these processes.22998595
Hypoxic enhancement of exosome release by breast cancer cells.
King Hamish W, Michael Michael Z, Gleadle Jonathan M
BMC cancer
Exosomes are nanovesicles secreted by tumour cells which have roles in paracrine signalling during tumour progression, including tumour-stromal interactions, activation of proliferative pathways and bestowing immunosuppression. Hypoxia is an important feature of solid tumours which promotes tumour progression, angiogenesis and metastasis, potentially through exosome-mediated signalling.
Breast cancer cell lines were cultured under either moderate (1% O2) or severe (0.1% O2) hypoxia. Exosomes were isolated from conditioned media and quantitated by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and immunoblotting for the exosomal protein CD63 in order to assess the impact of hypoxia on exosome release. Hypoxic exosome fractions were assayed for miR-210 by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and normalised to exogenous and endogenous control genes. Statistical significance was determined using the Student T test with a P value of < 0.05 considered significant.
Exposure of three different breast cancer cell lines to moderate (1% O2) and severe (0.1% O2) hypoxia resulted in significant increases in the number of exosomes present in the conditioned media as determined by NTA and CD63 immunoblotting. Activation of hypoxic signalling by dimethyloxalylglycine, a hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) hydroxylase inhibitor, resulted in significant increase in exosome release. Transfection of cells with HIF-1α siRNA prior to hypoxic exposure prevented the enhancement of exosome release by hypoxia. The hypoxically regulated miR-210 was identified to be present at elevated levels in hypoxic exosome fractions.
These data provide evidence that hypoxia promotes the release of exosomes by breast cancer cells, and that this hypoxic response may be mediated by HIF-1α. Given an emerging role for tumour cell-derived exosomes in tumour progression, this has significant implications for understanding the hypoxic tumour phenotype, whereby hypoxic cancer cells may release more exosomes into their microenvironment to promote their own survival and invasion.22994699
High on-treatment platelet reactivity on commonly prescribed antiplatelet agents following transient ischaemic attack or ischaemic stroke: results from the Trinity Antiplatelet Responsiveness (TRAP) study.
Tobin W O, Kinsella J A, Coughlan T, Collins D R, O'Neill D, Murphy R P, Egan B, Tierney S, Feeley T M, McCabe D J H
European journal of neurology : the official journal of the European Federation of Neurological Societies
The prevalence of ex vivo 'high on-treatment platelet reactivity' (HTPR) to antiplatelet regimens in patients with ischaemic cerebrovascular disease (CVD) is uncertain.
HTPR was assessed with PFA-100 collagen-epinephrine (C-EPI) and collagen-ADP (C-ADP) cartridges. Platelet activation (CD62P, CD63 and leucocyte-platelet complex formation) was assessed with whole-blood flow cytometry. Patients were assessed at baseline [≤ 4 weeks of transient ischaemic attack (TIA) or ischaemic stroke], and at 14 days and ≥ 90 days after changing treatment from (i) no medication to aspirin monotherapy (N = 26) or (ii) aspirin to clopidogrel monotherapy (N = 22). HTPR was defined in a novel, 'longitudinal fashion' as failure to prolong relevant closure times compared with the patient's 'baseline value' before he/she underwent an antiplatelet change by more than twice the coefficient of variation of the assay.
(i) C-EPI closure times increased at 14 days and 90 days after commencing aspirin (P = 0.002); 24% at 14 days and 18% at 90 days demonstrated HTPR on aspirin. (ii) C-ADP closure times increased at 14 days (P = 0.001) but not 90 days (P = 0.09) after changing from aspirin to clopidogrel; 41% at 14 days, and 35% at 90 days demonstrated HTPR on clopidogrel. Platelet activation was unaffected by aspirin (P = 0.09). The percentage neutrophil-platelet complexes decreased at 14 days (P = 0.02), but this reduction was not maintained 90 days after changing to clopidogrel (P = 0.3). No patient had a recurrent vascular event during prospective follow-up.
Longitudinal definitions of HTPR in patients with ischaemic CVD who are undergoing a change in antiplatelet therapy have the potential to provide more clinically meaningful information than traditional 'cross-sectional definitions' of HTPR which are usually based on the comparison of patients' values with those in healthy controls. Using our novel, longitudinal definition of HTPR, the PFA-100 could be used to monitor ex vivo responsiveness to aspirin, and larger, prospective studies are warranted to assess the clinical predictive value of this and other platelet function tests in patients with ischaemic CVD.
© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.22987289
Adverse reactions in patients with B-cell lymphomas during combined treatment with rituximab: In vitro evaluation of rituximab hypersensitivity by basophil activation test.
Piva Elisa, Chieco-Bianchi Fulvia, Krajcar Valentino, Aversa Savina, Plebani Mario
American journal of hematology
22957045
Nitric oxide synthase and breast cancer: role of TIMP-1 in NO-mediated Akt activation.
Ridnour Lisa A, Barasch Kimberly M, Windhausen Alisha N, Dorsey Tiffany H, Lizardo Michael M, Yfantis Harris G, Lee Dong H, Switzer Christopher H, Cheng Robert Y S, Heinecke Julie L, Brueggemann Ernst, Hines Harry B, Khanna Chand, Glynn Sharon A, Ambs Stefan, Wink David A
PloS one
Prediction of therapeutic response and cancer patient survival can be improved by the identification of molecular markers including tumor Akt status. A direct correlation between NOS2 expression and elevated Akt phosphorylation status has been observed in breast tumors. Tissue inhibitor matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) has been proposed to exert oncogenic properties through CD63 cell surface receptor pathway initiation of pro-survival PI3k/Akt signaling. We employed immunohistochemistry to examine the influence of TIMP-1 on the functional relationship between NOS2 and phosphorylated Akt in breast tumors and found that NOS2-associated Akt phosphorylation was significantly increased in tumors expressing high TIMP-1, indicating that TIMP-1 may further enhance NO-induced Akt pathway activation. Moreover, TIMP-1 silencing by antisense technology blocked NO-induced PI3k/Akt/BAD phosphorylation in cultured MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. TIMP-1 protein nitration and TIMP-1/CD63 co-immunoprecipitation was observed at NO concentrations that induced PI3k/Akt/BAD pro-survival signaling. In the survival analysis, elevated tumor TIMP-1 predicted poor patient survival. This association appears to be mainly restricted to tumors with high NOS2 protein. In contrast, TIMP-1 did not predict poor survival in patient tumors with low NOS2 expression. In summary, our findings suggest that tumors with high TIMP-1 and NOS2 behave more aggressively by mechanisms that favor Akt pathway activation.22943204
Non-genomic inhibitory effect of glucocorticoids on activated peripheral blood basophils through suppression of lipid raft formation.
Yamagata S, Tomita K, Sano H, Itoh Y, Fukai Y, Okimoto N, Watatani N, Inbe S, Miyajima H, Tsukamoto K, Santoh H, Ichihashi H, Sano A, Sato R, Tohda Y
Clinical and experimental immunology
We investigated the non-genomic effects of glucocorticoids (GCs) on inhibition of plasma membrane lipid raft formation in activated human basophils. Human basophils obtained from house dust mite (HDM)-sensitive volunteers were pretreated with hydrocortisone (CORT) or dexamethasone (Dex) for 30 min and then primed with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, 10 ng/ml) or HDM (10 µg/ml). The expression of CD63, a basophil activation marker, was assessed by flow cytometry. Membrane-bound GC receptors (mGCRs) were analysed by flow cytometry and confocal laser microscopy. Lipid rafts were assessed using a GM1 ganglioside probe and visualization by confocal laser microscopy. Pretreatment of basophils with CORT (10(-4) M and 10(-5) M) and Dex (10(-7) M) significantly inhibited CD63 expression 20 min after addition of PMA or HDM. The inhibitory effects of GCs were not altered by the nuclear GC receptor (GCR) antagonist RU486 (10(-5) M) or the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (10(-4) M) (P < 0·05). CORT coupled to bovine serum albumin (BSA-CORT) mimicked the rapid inhibitory effects of CORT, suggesting the involvement of mGCRs. mGCRs were detectable on the plasma membrane of resting basophils and formed nanoclusters following treatment with PMA or HDM. Pretreatment of cells with BSA-CORT inhibited the expression of mGCRs and nanoclustering of ganglioside GM1 in lipid rafts. The study provides evidence that non-genomic mechanisms are involved in the rapid inhibitory effect of GCs on the formation of lipid raft nanoclusters, through binding to mGCRs on the plasma membrane of activated basophils.
© 2012 British Society for Immunology.22921594
Imaging exosome transfer from breast cancer cells to stroma at metastatic sites in orthotopic nude-mouse models.
Suetsugu Atsushi, Honma Kimi, Saji Shigetoyo, Moriwaki Hisataka, Ochiya Takahiro, Hoffman Robert M
Advanced drug delivery reviews
Exosomes play an important role in cell-to-cell communication to promote tumor metastasis. In order to image the fate of cancer-cell-derived exosomes in orthotopic nude mouse models of breast cancer, we used green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged CD63, which is a general marker of exosomes. Breast cancer cells transferred their own exosomes to other cancer cells and normal lung tissue cells in culture. In orthotopic nude-mouse models, breast cancer cells secreted exosomes into the tumor microenvironment. Tumor-derived exosomes were incorporated into tumor-associated cells as well as circulating in the blood of mice with breast cancer metastases. These results suggest that tumor-derived exosomes may contribute to forming a niche to promote tumor growth and metastasis. Our results demonstrate the usefulness of GFP imaging to investigate the role of exosomes in cancer metastasis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.22917930
Humanised mice have functional human neutrophils.
Coughlan Alice M, Freeley Simon J, Robson Michael G
Journal of immunological methods
The differences between murine and human neutrophils mean that findings in mice may not translate to humans, and therefore an in vivo model with human neutrophils would be an important methodological advance. We generated humanised mice by injecting human cord blood derived CD34+ stem cells into irradiated NOD-scid-γc(-/-) mice. At least 3 months after engraftment, treatment of mice with GCSF mobilised circulating human neutrophils, which comprised 2.6% of human leukocytes, and led to L-selectin shedding and upregulation of CD66b, CD11b and CD63. Subsequent in vivo LPS treatment led to further downregulation of L-selectin with upregulation of CD66b and CD63, and also resulted in human neutrophil sequestration in the lungs. Furthermore, human neutrophils from these mice were capable of robust functional responses. They were shown to undergo a respiratory burst, and to degranulate with upregulation of CD63 and CD66b, in response to fMLP and Escherichia coli. These data show that functional human neutrophils develop from CD34+ cord blood stem cells in NOD-scid-γc(-/-) mice. They suggest that this approach may facilitate the in vivo study of human neutrophils in clinically relevant models of infection and autoimmunity.
Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.22916829
N-octanoyl-dopamine is a potent inhibitor of platelet function.
Ait-Hsiko Lamia, Kraaij Tineke, Wedel Johannes, Theisinger Bastian, Theisinger Sonja, Yard Benito, Bugert Peter, Schedel Angelika
Platelets
Dopamine (DA) is a co-agonist for platelet activation; yet, donor DA treatment is associated with improved transplantation outcome in renal and heart recipients. Recently, N-octanoyl-dopamine (NOD) was developed which displays superior effects compared to DA in terms of graft protecting properties. Whereas DA is a known platelet co-agonist, the effect of NOD on platelet function is unknown. This is a hypothesis generating study with the aim to assess the effects and molecular mechanisms of NOD and NOD-like compounds on platelet function. The influence of DA, NOD, and NOD-like compounds on platelet responses to classical agonists (adenosine 5'-diphosphate (ADP), U46619) was investigated in six healthy donors by applying whole blood aggregometry (Multiplate®) and flow cytometry for Pac-1, CD62P, and CD63 expression. Changes in platelet cAMP concentrations were assessed by ELISA. While DA showed synergy in platelet activation by ADP and U46619, NOD caused significant inhibition of platelet function both in whole blood aggregometry and flow cytometry. The inhibitory effect of NOD was not mediated via cAMP levels. The nonredox-active NOD-analog N-octanoyl-tyramine had no effects on platelet function. Acetylated NOD conferred to NOD by intracellular esterases showed similar inhibitory effects as NOD. In contrast to DA, NOD is a potent inhibitor of platelet function most likely through intracellular redox-active processes. This adds to the overall protective effect of NOD on pre-transplantation injury and makes NOD an attractive candidate compound for donor or organ conditioning prior to transplantation.22905813
Pathogen inactivation of platelets using ultraviolet C light: effect on in vitro function and recovery and survival of platelets.
Bashir Saber, Cookson Philip, Wiltshire Michael, Hawkins Louise, Sonoda Luke, Thomas Stephen, Seltsam Axel, Tolksdorf Frank, Williamson Lorna M, Cardigan Rebecca
Transfusion
BACKGROUND: We evaluated the effect of treating platelets (PLTs) using ultraviolet (UV)C light without the addition of any photosensitizing chemicals on PLT function in vitro and PLT recovery and survival in an autologous radiolabeled volunteer study. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: For in vitro studies, pooled or single buffy coat-derived PLT concentrates (PCs) were pooled and split to obtain identical PCs that were either treated with UVC or untreated (n = 6 each) and stored for 7 days. PLT recovery and survival were determined in a two-arm parallel autologous study in healthy volunteers performed according to BEST guidelines. UVC-treated or untreated PCs (n = 6 each) were stored for 5 days and were compared to fresh PLTs from the same donor. RESULTS: There were no significant differences on Day 7 of storage between paired UVC-treated and control PC units for pH, adenosine triphosphate, lactate dehydrogenase, CD62P, CD63, PLT microparticles, and JC-1 binding, but annexin V binding, lactate accumulation, and expression of CD41/61 were significantly higher in treated units (p < 0.05). Compared with control units, the recovery and survival of UVC-treated PC were reduced after 5 days of storage (p < 0.05) and when expressed as a percentage of fresh values, survival was reduced by 20% (p = 0.005) and recovery by 17% (p = 0.088). CONCLUSION: UVC-treated PLTs stored for 5 days showed marginal changes in PLT metabolism and activation in vitro and were associated with a degree of reduction in recovery and survival similar to other pathogen inactivation systems that are licensed and in use.
© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.22895844
Exosomes secreted from human colorectal cancer cell lines contain mRNAs, microRNAs and natural antisense RNAs, that can transfer into the human hepatoma HepG2 and lung cancer A549 cell lines.
Chiba Mitsuru, Kimura Misako, Asari Saya
Oncology reports
Exosomes are microvesicles that are released from various cells into the extracellular space. It has been reported that the components within exosomes vary according to the type of secreted cell. In the present study, we investigated the tetraspanin family proteins CD63, CD9 and CD81 as useful collection markers of exosomes derived from the three colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines HCT-15, SW480 and WiDr. In addition, we aimed to detect the mRNAs, microRNAs and natural antisense RNAs within the exosomes secreted from the three CRC cell lines. Furthermore, we examined whether exosomes containing their RNAs were transferred into the hepatoma cell line HepG2 and lung cancer cell line A549. CD81 was detected in exosomes secreted from the three CRC cell lines. This result indicates that CD81 can be a collection marker of exosomes derived from the three CRC cell lines. When the RNA species within exosomes derived from the three CRC cell lines were examined, the mRNAs of housekeeping genes such as ACTB and GAPDH, the microRNAs such as miR-21, miR-192 and miR-221, and the natural antisense RNAs of LRRC24, MDM2 and CDKN1A genes, were detected. We discovered their natural antisense RNAs within exosomes for the first time in the present study. Furthermore, PKH67-labeled exosomes derived from the CRC cell lines were taken up into HepG2 and A549 cells. These findings indicate that the intracellular RNAs enclosed within exosomes are secreted to the outside, and exosomes derived from the CRC cell lines are transferred into HepG2 and A549 cells. In conclusion, we reveal that exosomes derived from the CRC cell lines contain mRNAs, microRNAs and natural antisense RNAs, and can be delivered into HepG2 and A549 cells. These findings indicate that exosomal RNAs can shuttle between cells, and may be involved in the regulation of gene expression in recipient cells.22894778
The effect of stimuli on basophil-mediated atopic responses during asthmatic lying-in women and in newborns.
Yang Ling, Guo Yin-Shi, Jiang Jin-Qi, Guo Xue-Jun, Xu Yi-Ping, Tian Ye, Xiong Ying, Han Li
Hybridoma (2005)
Morbidity from allergic diseases is increasing. Basophils play a critical role in systemic anaphylaxis and chronic allergic inflammation. The prenatal environment must be regarded as a possible early risk factor for allergic diseases in children. Our objective was to determine if basophils harvested from neonates genetically predisposed to atopic disease had different levels of CD63 expression and IL-4 release properties in response to various stimuli (peptidoglycan, Dermatophagoides farinae, hyperosmotic mannitol). Blood samples were collected from 16 asthmatic and 18 healthy women and their newborns. Peripheral blood basophil histamine was measured using the human basophil degranulation test (HBDT), whereas activation was assessed by flow cytometric measurement of CD63 expression on the cord blood basophil surface. IL-4 levels were quantified by ELISA following allergen stimulation. The basophil degranulation index (DI) in granulocytes harvested from the peripheral blood of asthmatic women was assessed following stimulation with peptidoglycan (PGN), Dermatophagoides farinae (Df ) extract, or hyperosmotic mannitol. The DI was significantly higher in atopic women than in healthy controls. Upregulation of CD63 on the cord blood basophil surface was also detected in response to these stimuli. Basophils purified from the cord blood of neonates born to atopic mothers produced more IL-4 compared to basophils purified from the controls. These data suggested that various stimuli play a role in augmenting allergic reactions via modulation of activated basophil cytokine secretion. It may require new methods to stabilize the basophils in allergic diseases.22834727
Extended diagnostic value of autologous serum skin test and basophil CD63 expression assay in chronic urticaria.
Irinyi B, Gyimesi E, Garaczi E, Bata Z S, Kemény L, Zeher M, Remenyik E, Szegedi A
The British journal of dermatology
22827041
[Isolation and proteomic analysis of exosomes secreted by human cancer cells in vitro].

Tsitologiia
Exosomes are 20-100 nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin secreted by most cell types in vitro and in vivo. Since exosomes contain both RNA (mRNA and microRNA) and proteins, which can be transferred to another cell, and be functional in that new environment, these vesicles may be involved in the communication between cells. The secretion of exosomes by tumor cells and their implication in the transport and propagation of infectious cargo suggest their participation in pathological situations. Our purpose here is to describe methods for the production, purification, and proteomic characterization of exosomes derived from human cancer cells in vitro. Based on exosomes' unique lipidic composition, we have developed the new approach to increase production of exosomes by cells in vitro. Secondly, we have developed quality control by laser correlation spectroscopy for exosomal assays based on the amount of MHC class I and CD63 molecules on their surface. At last, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry was used after 2D electrophoresis for the proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from cancer cell lines. This study describes the protein composition of brain tumor cell-derived exosomes in more detail.22819512
Basophil reactivity, wheal size, and immunoglobulin levels distinguish degrees of cow's milk tolerance.
Ford Lara S, Bloom Katherine A, Nowak-Węgrzyn Anna H, Shreffler Wayne G, Masilamani Madhan, Sampson Hugh A
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
In our previous study about 75% of children with cow's milk allergy tolerated baked milk products, which improved their prognosis and quality of life.
We sought to identify biomarkers of varying degrees of clinical tolerance among a cohort of children with cow's milk allergy.
One hundred thirty-two subjects were initially classified as baked milk-reactive, baked milk-tolerant, or having "outgrown milk allergy" based on the results of oral food challenges. The baked milk-tolerant group was then divided into 3 groups based on the amount and degree of heat-denatured milk protein that they could tolerate. Serum was analyzed for allergen-specific IgE and IgG(4) levels, basophil reactivity was assessed in whole blood stimulated with serial 10-fold dilutions of milk protein, and skin prick tests (SPTs) were performed to commercial milk extract. Activated basophils were defined by using flow cytometry as CD63(bright)CD203c(+)CD123(+)HLA-DR(dim/-)CD41a(-)lineage(-). Data were analyzed by using the Jonckheere-Terpstra test.
Significant differences across the 5 clinical groups were seen for median casein- and milk-specific IgE levels, casein-specific IgG(4) levels, and casein IgE/IgG(4) ratios; milk-specific to nonspecific basophil activation ratio, median basophil reactivity, and spontaneous basophil activation (CD203c expression after stimulation with RPMI); and milk SPT wheal diameters. Casein- and milk-specific IgE level, milk-specific basophil reactivity, and milk SPT wheal diameter are all significantly greater among patients with milk allergy who react to baked milk than among those who tolerate it.
The majority of patients with milk allergy are able to tolerate some forms of baked milk in their diets. Different phenotypes of children with cow's milk allergy can be distinguished by casein- and milk-specific IgE levels, milk-specific basophil reactivity, and milk SPT mean wheal diameters. Spontaneous basophil activation is greater among patients with more severe clinical milk reactivity.
Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.22812215
[Basophil CD63 expression in the blood of the anaphylactic shock rat].
Jing Li-xia, Guo Xiang-jie, Jin Qian-qian, Huang Miao-miao, Gao Cai-rong
Fa yi xue za zhi
To explore the value of flow cytometry in anaphylactic shock diagnosis by CD63 expression being detected using flow cytometry to conform the activation of basophils.
Sixteen rats were randomly divided into two groups: control group and anaphylactic shock group. The model of anaphylactic shock rat with ovalbumin injection was established. CD63, CD45 and CD203c antibody combination, flow cytometry was employed to detected blood basophil CD63 expression. Immunofluorescence method was employed to observe the CD63 immunofluorescence staining in the rat lung tissue.
(1) Pure basophils were obtained by CD45 and CD203c gating. (2) The percentages of basophils CD63 were (17.34 +/- 2.04)% and (1.52 +/- 0.35)% in the experimental and control group, respectively. The differences between two groups were statistically significant (P < 0.01). (3) Compared with the control group, the expression of CD63 in basophils increased in anaphylactic shock lung tissue.
The detection of CD63 by flow cytometry could be the supplement of vivo allergic reactions and have good clinical value.22805467
Evidence of pathway-specific basophil anergy induced by peanut oral immunotherapy in peanut-allergic children.
Thyagarajan A, Jones S M, Calatroni A, Pons L, Kulis M, Woo C S, Kamalakannan M, Vickery B P, Scurlock A M, Wesley Burks A, Shreffler W G
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
In Westernized countries, over 1% of the population is allergic to peanuts or tree nuts, which carries a risk of severe allergic reactions. Several studies support the efficacy of peanut oral immunotherapy (OIT) for reducing the clinical sensitivity of affected individuals; however, the mechanisms of this effect are still being characterized. One mechanism that may contribute is the suppression of effector cells, such as basophils. Basophil anergy has been characterized in vitro as a pathway-specific hyporesponsiveness; however, this has not been demonstrated to occur in vivo.
To evaluate the hypothesis that basophil anergy occurs in vivo due to chronic allergen exposure in the setting of a clinical oral immunotherapy trial.
Samples of peripheral blood were obtained from subjects during a placebo-controlled clinical trial of peanut OIT. Basophil reactivity to in vitro stimulation with peanut allergen and controls was assessed by the upregulation of activation markers, CD63 and CD203c, measured by flow cytometry.
The upregulation of CD63 following stimulation of the IgE receptor, either specifically with peanut allergen or non-specifically with anti-IgE antibody, was strongly suppressed by active OIT. However, OIT did not significantly suppress this response in basophils stimulated by the distinct fMLP receptor pathway. In the subset of subjects with egg sensitization, active peanut OIT also suppressed CD63 upregulation in response to stimulation with egg allergen. Allergen OIT also suppressed the upregulation of CD203c including in response to stimulation with IL-3 alone.
Peanut OIT induces a hyporesponsive state in basophils that is consistent with pathway-specific anergy previously described in vitro. This suggests the hypothesis that effector cell anergy could contribute to clinical desensitization.
© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.22797901
A sharp fluctuation in peripheral blood cells shortly after dasatinib administration.
Imagawa Jun, Tanaka Hideo, Matsumoto Kana, Morita Kunihiko, Harada Yuka, Harada Hironori
International journal of hematology
Dasatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has a reduced plasma half-life and a more extensive inhibition profile, including targeting of Src family kinases. We monitored the peripheral blood count and the serum concentration of dasatinib over time. Interestingly, we found a transient fluctuation of blood cells, which correlated with the dasatinib level. The peripheral blood count before intake of dasatinib was compared with counts measured 2 h later in blood samples from 23 patients. Total white blood cells (WBCs) increased by 2,186 ± 1,960/μL from baseline (P = 0.00002), whereas platelets decreased from a baseline of 185 ± 47 × 10(3)/μL to 164 ± 52 × 10(3)/μL (P = 0.0007). Similar phenomena were not observed in patients treated with imatinib or nilotinib. In addition, in contrast to imatinib, dasatinib strongly attenuated the expression of CD18, CD62P and CD63 by blood cells both in vivo and in vitro. These results suggest that this drug may influence the distribution of blood cells in vivo by regulating its specific adhesion molecule expression on blood cells.22797057
Leukemia cell to endothelial cell communication via exosomal miRNAs.
Umezu T, Ohyashiki K, Kuroda M, Ohyashiki J H
Oncogene
Recent findings indicate that specific microRNAs (miRNAs), such as those of the miR-17-92 cluster, may be responsible for regulating endothelial gene expression during tumor angiogenesis. Secreted miRNAs enclosed in exosomes also have an important role in cell-cell communication. To elucidate whether miRNAs secreted from neoplastic cells transfer into endothelial cells and are functionally active in the recipient cells, we investigated the effect of exosomal miRNAs derived from leukemia cells (K562) on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). As K562 cells released the miR-17-92 cluster, especially miR-92a, into the extracellular environment, K562 cells, transfected with Cy3-labeled pre-miR-92a, were co-cultured with HUVECs. Cy3-miR-92a derived from K562 cells was detected in the cytoplasm of HUVECs, and the Cy3-miR-92a co-localized with the signals of an exosomal marker, CD63. The expression of integrin α5, a target gene for miR-92a, was significantly reduced in HUVECs by exosomal miR-92a, indicating that exogenous miRNA via exosomal transport can function like endogenous miRNA in HUVECs. The most salient feature of this study is the exosome, derived from K562 cells with enforced miR-92a expression, did not affect the growth of HUVECs but did enhance endothelial cell migration and tube formation. Our results support the idea that exosomal miRNAs have an important role in neoplasia-to-endothelial cell communication.Oncogene advance online publication, 16 July 2012; doi:10.1038/onc.2012.295.22786763
Reversal of pathology in CHMP2B-mediated frontotemporal dementia patient cells using RNA interference.
Nielsen Troels Tolstrup, Mizielinska Sarah, Hasholt Lis, Isaacs Adrian M, Nielsen Jørgen E, None None
The journal of gene medicine
Frontotemporal dementia is the second most common form of young-onset dementia after Alzheimer's disease, and several genetic forms of frontotemporal dementia are known. A rare genetic variant is caused by a point mutation in the CHMP2B gene. CHMP2B is a component of the ESCRT-III complex, which is involved in endosomal trafficking of proteins targeted for degradation in lysosomes. Mutations in CHMP2B result in abnormal endosomal structures in patient fibroblasts and patient brains, probably through a gain-of-function mechanism, suggesting that the endosomal pathway plays a central role in the pathogenesis of the disease.
In the present study, we used lentiviral vectors to efficiently knockdown CHMP2B by delivering microRNA embedded small hairpin RNAs.
We show that CHMP2B can be efficiently knocked down in patient fibroblasts using an RNA interference approach and that the knockdown causes reversal of the abnormal endosomal phenotype observed in patient fibroblasts.
This is the first description of a treatment that reverses the cellular pathology caused by mutant CHMP2B and suggests that RNA interference might be a feasible therapeutic strategy. Furthermore, it provides the first proof of a direct link between the disease-causing mutation and the cellular phenotype in cells originating from CHMP2B mutation patients.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.22781129
ARF6-mediated endosomal transport of Telencephalin affects dendritic filopodia-to-spine maturation.
Raemaekers Tim, Peric Aleksandar, Baatsen Pieter, Sannerud Ragna, Declerck Ilse, Baert Veerle, Michiels Christine, Annaert Wim
The EMBO journal
Dendritic filopodia are dynamic structures thought to be the precursors of spines during synapse development. Morphological maturation to spines is associated with the stabilization and strengthening of synapses, and can be altered in various neurological disorders. Telencephalin (TLN/intercellular adhesion molecule-5 (ICAM5)) localizes to dendritic filopodia, where it facilitates their formation/maintenance, thereby slowing spine morphogenesis. As spines are largely devoid of TLN, its exclusion from the filopodia surface appears to be required in this maturation process. Using HeLa cells and primary hippocampal neurons, we demonstrate that surface removal of TLN involves internalization events mediated by the small GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6), and its activator EFA6A. This endocytosis of TLN affects filopodia-to-spine transition, and requires Rac1-mediated dephosphorylation/release of actin-binding ERM proteins from TLN. At the somato-dendritic surface, TLN and EFA6A are confined to distinct, flotillin-positive membrane subdomains. The co-distribution of TLN with this lipid raft marker also persists during its endosomal targeting to CD63-positive late endosomes. This suggests a specific microenvironment facilitating ARF6-mediated mobilization of TLN that contributes to promotion of dendritic spine development.22780869
The host endocytic pathway is essential for Plasmodium berghei late liver stage development.
Lopes da Silva Mafalda, Thieleke-Matos Carolina, Cabrita-Santos Laura, Ramalho José S, Wavre-Shapton Silène T, Futter Clare E, Barral Duarte C, Seabra Miguel C
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
The obligate intracellular liver stage of the Plasmodium parasite represents a bottleneck in the parasite life cycle and remains a promising target for therapeutic intervention. During this stage, parasites undergo dramatic morphological changes and achieve one of the fastest replication rates among eukaryotic species. Nevertheless, relatively little is known about the parasite interactions with the host hepatocyte. Using immunofluorescence, live cell imaging and electron microscopy, we show that Plasmodium berghei parasites are surrounded by vesicles from the host late endocytic pathway. We found that these vesicles are acidic and contain the membrane markers Rab7a, CD63 and LAMP1. When host cell vesicle acidification was disrupted using ammonium chloride or Concanamycin A during the late liver stage of infection, parasite survival was not affected, but schizont size was significantly decreased. Furthermore, when the host cell endocytic pathway was loaded with BSA-gold, gold particles were found within the parasite cytoplasm, showing the transport of material from the host endocytic pathway toward the parasite interior. These observations reveal a novel Plasmodium-host interaction and suggest that vesicles from the host endolysosomal pathway could represent an important source of nutrients exploited by the fast-growing late liver stage parasites.
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22777113
Resuscitation of traumatic hemorrhagic shock patients with hypertonic saline-without dextran-inhibits neutrophil and endothelial cell activation.
Junger Wolfgang G, Rhind Shawn G, Rizoli Sandro B, Cuschieri Joseph, Shiu Maria Y, Baker Andrew J, Li Linglin, Shek Pang N, Hoyt David B, Bulger Eileen M
Shock (Augusta, Ga.)
Posttraumatic inflammation and excessive neutrophil activation cause multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), a major cause of death among hemorrhagic shock patients. Traditional resuscitation strategies may exacerbate inflammation; thus, novel fluid treatments are needed to reduce such posttraumatic complications. Hypertonic resuscitation fluids inhibit inflammation and reduce MODS in animal models. Here we studied the anti-inflammatory efficacy of hypertonic fluids in a controlled clinical trial. Trauma patients in hypovolemic shock were resuscitated in a prehospital setting with 250 mL of either 7.5% hypertonic saline (HS; n = 9), 7.5% hypertonic saline + 6% dextran 70 (HSD; n = 8), or 0.9% normal saline (NS; n = 17). Blood samples were collected on hospital admission and 12 and 24 h after resuscitation. Multicolor flow cytometry was used to quantify neutrophil expression of cell-surface activation/adhesion (CD11b, CD62L, CD64) and degranulation (CD63, CD66b, CD35) markers as well as oxidative burst activity. Circulating concentrations of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVACM-1), P- and E-selectins, myeloperoxidase (MPO), and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) were assessed by immunoassay. Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, leukocytosis, and mortality were lower in the HS and HSD groups than in the NS group. However, these differences were not statistically significant. Hypertonic saline prevented priming and activation and neutrophil oxidative burst and CD11b and CD66b expression. Hypertonic saline also reduced circulating markers of neutrophil degranulation (MPO and MMP-9) and endothelial cell activation (sICAM-1, sVCAM-1, soluble E-selectin, and soluble P-selectin). Hypertonic saline + 6% dextran 70 was less capable than HS of suppressing the upregulation of most of these activation markers. This study demonstrates that initial resuscitation with HS, but neither NS nor HSD, can attenuate posttraumatic neutrophil and endothelial cell activation in hemorrhagic shock patients. These data suggest that hypertonic resuscitation without dextran may inhibit posttraumatic inflammation. However, despite this effect, neither HS nor HSD reduced MODS in trauma patients with hemorrhagic shock.22728711
Immunostimulatory and anti-neoplasm effects of a novel palindrome CpG oligodeoxynucleotide in mice.
Du Hai-yan, Dong Li-hou, Zhao Bi-jun, Fu Jie, Wang Qing-qing, Chen Fang, Ou Lun, Li Na, Sun Xiao, Tang Zhong-ming, Song Hai-feng
Acta pharmacologica Sinica
DNAs containing unmethylated CpG motifs can stimulate innate and adaptive immunity. The aim of this study was to investigate the immunostimulatory and anti-neoplasm effects of a novel CpG oligodeoxynucleotide, ODN10, in tumor-bearing mice.
B16 melanoma-bearing C57BL/6 mice were administered ip or sc with ODN10 or conventional CpG ODN1826 on the indicated days post inoculation. The animal survival rate and the inhibitory effect on tumor growth were observed in vivo. B and T lymphocyte proliferation, natural killing cell cytotoxicity and the phagocytic ability of peritoneal macrophages from the animals were determined using [(3)H]-thymidine incorporation assay, 4-h (51)Cr release assay and neutral red chromometry method, respectively. The serum levels of IL-12, IL-4 and IgE were quantified using ELISA assays. Histological examination of tumor tissues was performed after HE staining, and the expression of PCNA, CD63, and CD80 in tumor tissues was analyzed with immunohistochemistry.
ODN10 (1, 5 and 25 mg/kg) significantly inhibited the growth and metastasis of the tumor, and significantly prolonged the survival of tumor-bearing mice, as compared with ODN1826. The immune status was suppressed in tumor-bearing mice. Both ODN10 and ODN1826 significantly reversed the suppressed immunoactivities in tumor-bearing mice, which included promoting B and T lymphocyte proliferation, enhancing NK cell and peritoneal macrophage activities, inducing IL-12 secretion and inhibiting IL-4 and IgE secretion. Further, CpG ODNs decreased PCNA and CD63 expression while induced expression of CD80. ODN10 presented more potent activity, and displayed the most prominent immunostimulatory potential.
ODN10 produces prominent immunomodulatory effects on cellular immunity in tumor-bearing mice, which might help reverse the established Th2-type responses to the Th1-type responses, thus may be used as a potent anti-tumor immunotherapy agent or adjuvant.22722613
Marked differences in the signaling requirements for expression of CD203c and CD11b versus CD63 expression and histamine release in human basophils.
MacGlashan Donald
International archives of allergy and immunology
Many techniques are being used to examine the status of circulating human basophils including the enhanced expression of a variety of cell surface proteins. There is accumulating evidence that there are at least two compartments containing these activation marker proteins but there are only some indications for the signaling requirements for each of the compartments. This study began with published reports by other investigators who potentially dissociated CD63 expression from anaphylactic degranulation with the p38 inhibitor, SB203580, a possible falsification of a previously proposed hypothesis regarding CD63 expression. To explore the signaling requirements for CD63, a variety of pharmacological agents were used to inhibit or enhance 4 endpoints of basophil activation. First, it was found that inhibition of both histamine release and CD63 expression with SB203580 was concordant. But it was also found that this agent had no effect on increased expression of CD203c and CD11b. Actin polymerization inhibitors caused marked enhancement of CD63 expression (concordant with their effects on degranulation) with no effect on expression of CD203c and CD11b. The third generation syk inhibitor, NVP-QAB205, showed a 5-fold lower potency for inhibiting expression of CD203c and CD11b than for CD63. Finally, while desensitization of CD11b and CD203c expression occurs, it is slower than desensitization of the CD63 response. Taken together, these various observations demonstrate a marked difference in the early signaling requirements for the CD11b/CD203c compartment and CD63 degranulation and provide support for the hypothesis that CD11b and CD203c reside in a similar compartment.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.22682335
Evaluation of platelet function during extended storage in additive solution, prepared in a new container that allows manual buffy-coat platelet pooling and leucoreduction in the same system.
Plaza Eva María, Lozano María Luisa, Guiu Isabel Sánchez, Egea José Manuel, Vicente Vicente, De Terán Laura Collantes, Rivera José
Blood transfusion = Trasfusione del sangue
A novel and practical storage container designed for manual buffy-coat pooling and leucodepletion was evaluated to assess its filtration performance and to analyse the quality of stored leucoreduced buffy-coat-derived platelet pools.
To analyse the grifols leucored transfer PL system, blood was collected from random donors into standard triple bag systems, and fractionated using standard procedures to obtain buffy-coats. Ten leucodepleted platelet pools were prepared each from five units of buffy-coats in additive solution. Concentrates were stored for 10 days at 22 °C on an end-over-end agitator. On days 0, 5, 7, and 10 of storage, samples were tested using standard in vitro platelet parameters.
The use of this novel system for volume reduction and leucodepletion of buffy-coats resuspended in additive solution led to platelet pools that met the European requirements. pH was maintained well, declining from an initial value of 7.11±0.04 to 6.88±0.08 after 10 days. Parameters of cell lysis, response to a hypotonic stimulus and aggregation induced by agonists (arachidonic acid, ristocetin, collagen or thrombin receptor activating peptide) were also well-preserved. During storage, the quality profile of the platelet pools remained very similar to that previously reported in platelet concentrates in terms of metabolism, platelet activation (CD62, CD63, sCD62), expression of glycoproteins Ib and IIb/IIIa, capacity of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa to become activated upon ADP stimulation, and release of biological response modifiers (sCD40L and RANTES).
This new system allows the preparation of leucodepleted buffy-coat platelet pools in additive solution with good preservation of platelet function. The logistics of the procedure are relatively simple and it results in good-quality components, which may reduce costs and ease the process of buffy-coat pooling and leucocyte reduction in transfusion services.22665359
Oral muscle relaxant may induce immediate allergic reactions.
Hur Gyu-Young, Hwang Eui Kyung, Moon Jae-Young, Ye Young-Min, Shim Jae-Jeong, Park Hae-Sim, Kang Kyung-Ho
Yonsei medical journal
Eperisone and afloqualone act by relaxing both skeletal and vascular smooth muscles to improve circulation and suppress pain reflex. These drugs are typically prescribed with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as painkillers. However, there have been no reports on serious adverse reactions to oral muscle relaxants; and this is the first report to describe three allergic reactions caused by eperisone and afloqualone. All three patients had histories of allergic reactions after oral intake of multiple painkillers, including oral muscle relaxants and NSAIDs, for chronic muscle pain. An open-label oral challenge test was performed with each drug to confirm which drugs caused the systemic reactions. All patients experienced the same reactions within one hour after oral intake of eperisone or afloqualone. The severity of these reactions ranged from laryngeal edema to hypotension. To confirm that the systemic reaction was caused by eperisone or afloqualone, skin prick testing and intradermal skin tests were performed with eperisone or afloqualone extract in vivo, and basophil activity tests were performed after stimulation with these drugs in vitro. In one patient with laryngeal edema, the intradermal test with afloqualone extract had a positive result, and CD63 expression levels on basophils increased in a dose-dependent manner by stimulation with afloqualone. We report three allergic reactions caused by oral muscle relaxants that might be mediated by non-immunoglobulin E-mediated responses. Since oral muscle relaxants such as eperisone and afloqualone are commonly prescribed for chronic muscle pain and can induce severe allergic reactions, we should prescribe them carefully.22634254
Molecular characterization of a novel tetraspanin from the oyster, Crassostrea ariakensis: variation, localization and relationship to oyster host defense.
Luo Ming, Ye Shigen, Xu Ting, Wu Xinzhong, Yang Ping
Fish & shellfish immunology
We identified a tetraspanin family member gene, named Ca-TSP, in the oyster Crassostrea ariakensis and found that the transcription profiles of Ca-TSP were variable in the oyster hemocytes. Three distinct patterns of variation of Ca-TSP were observed. Using immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy, we show that Ca-TSP was present in granules and in vesicular structures of the oyster hemocyte. Sequence analysis, structural features and immunogold electron microscopy showed that Ca-TSP is an integral membrane glycoprotein of granules of hemocyte and may be a novel CD63-like gene of the tetraspanin family of molluscs. The gene expression analysis of Ca-TSP using isolated oyster hemocytes, was done following challenge of the oysters with LPS and Poly I:C. The Ca-TSP mRNA levels increased in hemocytes in the first 12 h after LPS and Poly I:C stimulation, and decreased after the addition of H(2)O(2). Western blot analysis using anti-Ca-TSP antibody indicated that gene expression and protein levels were similar. The recombinant Ca-TSP was found to significantly inhibit hemocytes aggregation. Our results suggested that Ca-TSP participates in the innate immunity of the oyster.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.22627113
Climacteric lowers plasma levels of platelet-derived microparticles: a pilot study in pre- versus postmenopausal women.
Rank Andreas, Nieuwland Rienk, Roesner Sabine, Nikolajek Katharina, Hiller Erhard, Toth Bettina
Acta haematologica
Climacteric increases the risk of thrombotic events by alteration of plasmatic coagulation. Up to now, less is known about changes in platelet- (PMP) and endothelial cell-derived microparticles (EMP).
In this prospective study, plasma levels of microparticles (MP) were compared in 21 premenopausal and 19 postmenopausal women.
No altered numbers of total MP or EMP were measured within the study groups. However, the plasma values of CD61-exposing MP from platelets/megakaryocytes were higher in premenopausal women (5,364 × 10(6)/l, range 4,384-17,167) as compared to postmenopausal women (3,808 × 10(6)/l, range 2,009-8,850; p = 0.020). This differentiation was also significant for the subgroup of premenopausal women without hormonal contraceptives (5,364 × 10(6)/l, range 4,223-15,916; p = 0.047; n = 15). Furthermore, in premenopausal women, higher plasma levels of PMP exposing CD62P were also present as compared to postmenopausal women (288 × 10(6)/l, range 139-462, vs. 121 × 10(6)/l, range 74-284; p = 0.024). This difference was also true for CD63+ PMP levels (281 × 10(6)/l, range 182-551, vs. 137 × 10(6)/l, range 64-432; p = 0.015).
Climacteric lowers the level of PMP but has no impact on the number of EMP in women. These data suggest that PMP and EMP do not play a significant role in enhancing the risk of thrombotic events in healthy, postmenopausal women.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.22624015
Plant food delphinidin-3-glucoside significantly inhibits platelet activation and thrombosis: novel protective roles against cardiovascular diseases.
Yang Yan, Shi Zhenyin, Reheman Adili, Jin Joseph W, Li Conglei, Wang Yiming, Andrews Marc C, Chen Pingguo, Zhu Guangheng, Ling Wenhua, Ni Heyu
PloS one
Delphinidin-3-glucoside (Dp-3-g) is one of the predominant bioactive compounds of anthocyanins in many plant foods. Although several anthocyanin compounds have been reported to be protective against cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), the direct effect of anthocyanins on platelets, the key players in atherothrombosis, has not been studied. The roles of Dp-3-g in platelet function are completely unknown. The present study investigated the effects of Dp-3-g on platelet activation and several thrombosis models in vitro and in vivo. We found that Dp-3-g significantly inhibited human and murine platelet aggregation in both platelet-rich plasma and purified platelets. It also markedly reduced thrombus growth in human and murine blood in perfusion chambers at both low and high shear rates. Using intravital microscopy, we observed that Dp-3-g decreased platelet deposition, destabilized thrombi, and prolonged the time required for vessel occlusion. Dp-3-g also significantly inhibited thrombus growth in a carotid artery thrombosis model. To elucidate the mechanisms, we examined platelet activation markers via flow cytometry and found that Dp-3-g significantly inhibited the expression of P-selectin, CD63, CD40L, which reflect platelet α- and δ-granule release, and cytosol protein secretion, respectively. We further demonstrated that Dp-3-g downregulated the expression of active integrin αIIbβ3 on platelets, and attenuated fibrinogen binding to platelets following agonist treatment, without interfering with the direct interaction between fibrinogen and integrin αIIbβ3. We found that Dp-3-g reduced phosphorylation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase, which may contribute to the observed inhibitory effects on platelet activation. Thus, Dp-3-g significantly inhibits platelet activation and attenuates thrombus growth at both arterial and venous shear stresses, which likely contributes to its protective roles against thrombosis and CVDs.22620679
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid exosomes contribute to cytokine and leukotriene production in allergic asthma.
Torregrosa Paredes P, Esser J, Admyre C, Nord M, Rahman Q K, Lukic A, Rådmark O, Grönneberg R, Grunewald J, Eklund A, Scheynius A, Gabrielsson S
Allergy
Leukotrienes (LTs) are potent pro-inflammatory mediators involved in asthma. Exosomes, nanosized vesicles released from various cells, can stimulate or down-regulate immune responses, depending on the state and nature of the originating cell. We have recently shown an altered exosome profile in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with sarcoidosis, but their role in asthma is unknown. Our aims were to investigate whether exosomes from BALF have LT biosynthetic capacity and to explore phenotypic and functional characteristics of BALF exosomes in asthma.
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid exosomes were collected from healthy individuals (n = 13) and patients with mild allergic asthma to birch pollen (n = 12) before and after birch allergen provocation. Exosomes were characterized by flow cytometry and Western blot. Their capacity to induce IL-8 and LT production in the human bronchial epithelial cell (BEC) line 16HB14o- was measured by ELISA and reverse-phase HPLC, respectively.
Compared to BALF exosomes from healthy individuals, BALF exosomes from asthmatics displayed higher levels of exosome-associated markers, such as the tetraspanins CD63 and CD81 and the scavenger receptor CD36. No major differences were observed between BALF exosomes from before and after allergen provocation. Furthermore, we show that BALF exosomes contain enzymes for LT biosynthesis. The effect of exosomes to promote LTC(4) and IL-8 release in BEC was significantly increased for exosomes from asthmatics, and the CysLT(1) receptor antagonist Montelukast reduced exosome-induced IL-8 secretion.
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid exosomes from asthmatic and healthy individuals exhibit distinct phenotypes and functions. BALF exosomes from asthmatics might contribute to subclinical inflammation by increasing cytokine and LTC(4) generation in airway epithelium.
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22612317
Derivation of stromal (skeletal and mesenchymal) stem-like cells from human embryonic stem cells.
Mahmood Amer, Harkness Linda, Abdallah Basem M, Elsafadi Mona, Al-Nbaheen May S, Aldahmash Abdullah, Kassem Moustapha
Stem cells and development
Derivation of bone forming cells (osteoblasts) from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) is a prerequisite for their use in clinical applications. However, there is no standard protocol for differentiating hESCs into osteoblastic cells. The aim of this study was to identify the emergence of a human stromal (mesenchymal and skeletal) stem cell (hMSC)-like population, known to be osteoblastic cell precursors and to test their osteoblastic differentiation capacity in ex vivo cultures and in vivo. We cultured hESCs in a feeder-free environment using serum replacement and as suspension aggregates (embryoid bodies; hEBs). Over a 20 day developmental period, the hEBs demonstrated increasing enrichment for cells expressing hMSC markers: CD29, CD44, CD63, CD56, CD71, CD73, CD105, CD106, and CD166 as revealed by immunohistochemical staining and flow cytometry (fluorescence-activated cell sorting) analysis. Ex vivo differentiation of hEBs using bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2) combined with standard osteoblast induction medium led to weak osteoblastic induction. Conversely, subcutaneous in vivo implantation of day 20 hEBs in immune deficient mice, mixed with hydroxyapatite/tricalcium phosphate (HA/TCP) as an osteoconductive scaffold, revealed bone and cartilage, and fibrous tissue elements after 8 weeks. These tissues were of human origin and there was no evidence of differentiation to nonmesodermal tissues. hEBs implanted in the absence of HA/TCP formed vacuolated tissue containing glandular, fibrous and muscle-like tissue elements. Conversely, implantation of undifferentiated hESCs resulted in the formation of a teratoma containing a mixture of endodermal, mesodermal, and ectodermal tissues. Our study demonstrates that hMSC-like cells can be obtained from hESCs and they can be induced to form skeletal tissues in vivo when combined with HA/TCP. These findings are relevant for tissue engineering and suggest that differentiated hEBs can provide an unlimited source for functional osteogenic cells.22608296
Blood basophils from cystic fibrosis patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis are primed and hyper-responsive to stimulation by aspergillus allergens.
Gernez Yael, Dunn Colleen E, Everson Cassie, Mitsunaga Erin, Gudiputi Lakshmi, Krasinska Karolina, Davies Zoe A, Herzenberg Leonore A, Tirouvanziam Rabindra, Moss Richard B
Journal of cystic fibrosis : official journal of the European Cystic Fibrosis Society
Fifteen to sixty percent of cystic fibrosis patients harbor Aspergillus fumigatus (Af) in their airways (CF-AC) and some will develop allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (CF-ABPA). Since basophils play a key role in allergy, we hypothesized that they would display alterations in CF-ABPA patients compared to CF-AC or patients without Af colonization (CF).
Using flow cytometry, we measured CD203c, CD63 and CD123 levels on basophils from CF-ABPA (N=11), CF-AC (N=14), and CF (N=12) patients before and after ex vivo stimulation with Af allergens.
Baseline CD203c was increased in basophils from CF-ABPA compared to CF-AC and CF patients. Af extract and recombinant Aspf1 stimulated basophils from CF-ABPA patients to markedly upregulate CD203c, along with modest upregulation of CD63 and a CD123 downward trend. Plasma TARC/CCL17 at baseline and post-stimulation cell supernatant histamine levels were similar in the three groups.
In CF-ABPA, blood basophils are primed and hyperresponsive to Af allergen stimulation.
Copyright © 2012 European Cystic Fibrosis Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.22593480
Circulating microparticles in patients with benign and malignant ovarian tumors.
Rank A, Liebhardt S, Zwirner J, Burges A, Nieuwland R, Toth B
Anticancer research
Microparticles are known to be increased in various malignancies. In this prospective study, microparticle levels were evaluated in patients with benign and malignant ovarian lesions.
Microparticles from platelets/megakaryocytes, activated platelets and endothelial cells, tissue factor exposing microparticles and D-dimer values were examined in patients with newly diagnosed ovarian lesions before surgery, and were correlated with tumor histology.
Higher counts of CD63-positive microparticles were detected in patients with ovarian cancer [mean=276×10(6) (range: 64-948)/l; n=12] as compared to patients with benign ovarian tumors [146×10(6) (45-390)/l; n=21; p=0.014]. D-dimer values were also increased in patients with cancer [860 (180-4500) ng/l versus 280 (170-2720) ng/l; p=0.001].
Elevated levels of CD63-positive microparticles and D-dimer reflect the procoagulant phenotype of these patients. However, for the discrimination between benign and malignant ovarian tumors, measuring preoperative levels of microparticles does not seem to be helpful.22590533
Gametogenesis in the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas: a microarrays-based analysis identifies sex and stage specific genes.
Dheilly Nolwenn M, Lelong Christophe, Huvet Arnaud, Kellner Kristell, Dubos Marie-Pierre, Riviere Guillaume, Boudry Pierre, Favrel Pascal
PloS one
The Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas (Mollusca, Lophotrochozoa) is an alternative and irregular protandrous hermaphrodite: most individuals mature first as males and then change sex several times. Little is known about genetic and phenotypic basis of sex differentiation in oysters, and little more about the molecular pathways regulating reproduction. We have recently developed and validated a microarray containing 31,918 oligomers (Dheilly et al., 2011) representing the oyster transcriptome. The application of this microarray to the study of mollusk gametogenesis should provide a better understanding of the key factors involved in sex differentiation and the regulation of oyster reproduction.
Gene expression was studied in gonads of oysters cultured over a yearly reproductive cycle. Principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering showed a significant divergence in gene expression patterns of males and females coinciding with the start of gonial mitosis. ANOVA analysis of the data revealed 2,482 genes differentially expressed during the course of males and/or females gametogenesis. The expression of 434 genes could be localized in either germ cells or somatic cells of the gonad by comparing the transcriptome of female gonads to the transcriptome of stripped oocytes and somatic tissues. Analysis of the annotated genes revealed conserved molecular mechanisms between mollusks and mammals: genes involved in chromatin condensation, DNA replication and repair, mitosis and meiosis regulation, transcription, translation and apoptosis were expressed in both male and female gonads. Most interestingly, early expressed male-specific genes included bindin and a dpy-30 homolog and female-specific genes included foxL2, nanos homolog 3, a pancreatic lipase related protein, cd63 and vitellogenin. Further functional analyses are now required in order to investigate their role in sex differentiation in oysters.
This study allowed us to identify potential markers of early sex differentiation in the oyster C. gigas, an alternative hermaphrodite mollusk. We also provided new highly valuable information on genes specifically expressed by mature spermatozoids and mature oocytes.22589071
Platelet activation profiles on TiO2: effect of Ca2+ binding to the surface.
Gupta Swati, Reviakine Ilya
Biointerphases
Surface ion equilibrium is hypothesized to play an important role in defining the interactions between foreign materials and biological systems. In this study, we compare two surfaces with respect to their ability to activate adhering platelets. One is a commonly used implant material TiO(2), which binds Ca(2+), and the other one is glass, which does not. We show, that in the presence of Ca(2+), TiO(2) acts as an agonist, activating adhering platelets and causing the expression on their surface of two well-known activation markers, CD62P (P-selectin) and CD63. On the contrary, in the absence of Ca(2+), platelets adhering on TiO(2) express only one of the two markers, CD63. Platelets adhering on glass, as well as platelets challenged with soluble agonists in solution, express both markers independently of whether Ca(2+) is present or not. The expression of CD62P and CD63 is indicative of the exocytosis of the so-called α- and dense granules, respectively. It is a normal response of platelets to activation. Differences in the expression profiles of these two markers point to differential regulation of the exocytosis of the two kinds of granules, confirming the recent notion that platelets can tune their microenvironment in a trigger-specific fashion.22586080
Closed-form density-based framework for automatic detection of cellular morphology changes.
Duong Tarn, Goud Bruno, Schauer Kristine
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
A primary method for studying cellular function is to examine cell morphology after a given manipulation. Fluorescent markers attached to proteins/intracellular structures of interest in conjunction with 3D fluorescent microscopy are frequently exploited for functional analysis. Despite the central role of morphology comparisons in cell biological approaches, few statistical tools are available that allow biological scientists without a high level of statistical training to quantify the similarity or difference of fluorescent images containing multifactorial information. We transform intracellular structures into kernels and develop a multivariate two-sample test that is nonparametric and asymptotically normal to directly and quantitatively compare cellular morphologies. The asymptotic normality bypasses the computationally intensive calculations used by the usual resampling techniques to compute the P-value. Because all parameters required for the statistical test are estimated directly from the data, it does not require any subjective decisions. Thus, we provide a black-box method for unbiased, automated comparison of cell morphology. We validate the performance of our test statistic for finite synthetic samples and experimental data. Employing our test for the comparison of the morphology of intracellular multivesicular bodies, we detect changes in their distribution after disruption of the cellular microtubule cytoskeleton with high statistical significance in fixed samples and live cell analysis. These results demonstrate that density-based comparison of multivariate image information is a powerful tool for automated detection of cell morphology changes. Moreover, the underlying mathematics of our test statistic is a general technique, which can be applied in situations where two data samples are compared.22580589
Proteomics-based dissection of human endoderm progenitors by differential cell capture on antibody array.
Sharivkin Revital, Walker Michael D, Soen Yoav
Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP
Heterogeneity, shortage of material, and lack of progenitor-specific cell surface markers are major obstacles to elucidating the mechanisms underlying developmental processes. Here we report a proteomics platform that alleviates these difficulties and demonstrate its effectiveness in fractionating heterogeneous cultures of early endoderm derived from human embryonic stem cells. The approach, designated differential cell-capture antibody array, is based on highly parallel, comparative screening of live cell populations using hundreds of antibodies directed against cell-surface antigens. We used this platform to fractionate the hitherto unresolved early endoderm compartment of CXCR4+ cells and identify several endoderm (CD61+ and CD63+) and non-endoderm (CD271+, CD49F+, CD44+ and B2M+) sub-populations. We provide evidence that one of these sub-populations, CD61+, is directly derived from CXCR4+ cells, displays characteristic kinetics of emergence, and exhibits a distinct gene expression profile. The results demonstrate the potential of the cell-capture antibody array as a powerful proteomics tool for detailed dissection of heterogeneous cellular systems.22574859
The myxovirus-resistance protein, MX1, is a component of exosomes secreted by uterine epithelial cells.
Racicot Karen, Schmitt Anthony, Ott Troy
American journal of reproductive immunology (New York, N.Y. : 1989)
Dairy cattle suffer from high percentages of early embryonic loss, and therefore, it is critical to study the function of the uterus at this time. We hypothesize that the antiviral protein, myxovirus resistance (MX)1, regulates secretion in uterine glandular cells during early pregnancy.
Uterine epithelial cells were used to study uterine function, in vitro. Sucrose gradients, Western blotting, and transmission electron microscopy were used to isolate and identify exosomes. Immunofluorescence and ceramide inhibitors were used for the characterization of exosomes.
Myxovirus resistance1 was associated with exosomes and protected from proteases, indicating it was inside exosomes. MX1 partially colocalized with exosomal protein CD63, and a ceramide inhibitor reduced numbers of MX1-associated exosomes.
This study is the first to characterize MX1-associated exosomes, and we postulate that MX1 regulates secretion in epithelial cells by playing a role in exosome formation or trafficking.
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22574140
The fbpA/sapM double knock out strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is highly attenuated and immunogenic in macrophages.
Saikolappan Sankaralingam, Estrella Jaymie, Sasindran Smitha J, Khan Arshad, Armitige Lisa Y, Jagannath Chinnaswamy, Dhandayuthapani Subramanian
PloS one
Tuberculosis (TB), caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), is the leading cause of death due to bacterial infections in mankind, and BCG, an attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis, is an approved vaccine. BCG sequesters in immature phagosomes of antigen presenting cells (APCs), which do not fuse with lysosomes, leading to decreased antigen processing and reduced Th1 responses. However, an Mtb derived ΔfbpA attenuated mutant underwent limited phagosome maturation, enhanced immunogenicity and was as effective as BCG in protecting mice against TB. To facilitate phagosome maturation of ΔfbpA, we disrupted an additional gene sapM, which encodes for an acid phosphatase. Compared to the wild type Mtb, the ΔfbpAΔsapM (double knock out; DKO) strain was attenuated for growth in mouse macrophages and PMA activated human THP1 macrophages. Attenuation correlated with increased oxidants in macrophages in response to DKO infection and enhanced labeling of lysosomal markers (CD63 and rab7) on DKO phagosomes. An in vitro Antigen 85B peptide presentation assay was used to determine antigen presentation to T cells by APCs infected with DKO or other mycobacterial strains. This revealed that DKO infected APCs showed the strongest ability to present Ag85B to T cells (>2500 pgs/mL in 4 hrs) as compared to APCs infected with wild type Mtb or ΔfbpA or ΔsapM strain (<1000 pgs/mL in 4 hrs), indicating that DKO strain has enhanced immunogenicity than other strains. The ability of DKO to undergo lysosomal fusion and vacuolar acidification correlated with antigen presentation since bafilomycin, that inhibits acidification in APCs, reduced antigen presentation. Finally, the DKO vaccine elicited a better Th1 response in mice after subcutaneous vaccination than either ΔfbpA or ΔsapM. Since ΔfbpA has been used in mice as a candidate vaccine and the DKO (ΔfbpAΔsapM) mutant is more immunogenic than ΔfbpA, we propose the DKO is a potential anti-tuberculosis vaccine.22572984
Desensitization effect of preseasonal seven-injection allergoid immunotherapy with olive pollen on basophil activation: the efficacy of olive pollen-specific preseasonal allergoid immunotherapy on basophils.
Gokmen Nihal Mete, Ersoy Ramazan, Gulbahar Okan, Ardeniz Omur, Sin Aytul, Unsel Mehmet, Kokuludag Ali
International archives of allergy and immunology
It has previously been demonstrated that subcutaneous immunotherapy with allergoids positively affects clinical and immunological parameters even after 7 preseasonal injections. However, its effect on basophil activation remains unclear. We investigated the effect of preseasonal allergoid immunotherapy on basophils and concomitantly assessed its clinical and immunological efficacy in olive pollen-monosensitized patients.
This study enrolled 437 consecutive patients with respiratory allergy and positive skin prick tests (SPTs); 212 (48.5%) patients were sensitized to olive pollen, and 33 (7.5%) patients were sensitized to olive pollen only. Of these patients, 23 received preseasonal immunotherapy with an olive pollen allergoid. The olive pollen-specific basophil activation, the titrated nasal provocation test, the nasal symptom score, and olive pollen-specific IgE, IgG1 and IgG4 levels were evaluated before immunotherapy and 8 months after the end of immunotherapy in the follow-up visit.
In comparison to baseline evaluation, 7 preseasonal injections of an allergoid resulted in a significant decrease in the percentage of basophils expressing CD63 (29 vs. 7%, respectively, p < 0.0001) and a significant increase in the titrated nasal provocative dose (1/10 vs. 1/1, respectively, p < 0.01). SPT induration diameters caused by an olive pollen extract decreased (12 mm at baseline vs. 5.5 mm at follow-up, p < 0.005), as did nasal symptom score (7 at baseline vs. 3 at follow-up, p < 0.01). Olive pollen-specific IgE (17.5 vs. 50 kU/l, p < 0.012), IgG1 (0.16 vs. 2.9 µg/ml, p < 0.0001) and IgG4 (0.07 vs. 1.92 µg/ml, p < 0.0001) levels significantly increased.
Immunotherapy with 7 preseasonal injections of an olive pollen allergoid decreases olive pollen-specific basophil activation over 8 months, an effect observed in vitro and in vivo.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.22555087
Glucocorticosteroids rescue basophils from dasatinib-augmented immunoglobulin E-mediated histamine release.
Herrmann Harald, Blatt Katharina, Ghanim Viviane, Kneidinger Michael, Marth Katharina, Valenta Rudolf, Valent Peter
International archives of allergy and immunology
Dasatinib is a multikinase inhibitor active against several tyrosine kinases including ABL, KIT, Lyn and Btk. Apart from its known antileukemic activity, the drug produces several side effects including edemas and pleural effusions, which are supposedly triggered by activated immune cells. Effusion formation can be treated effectively by glucocorticosteroids. We have recently shown that low concentrations of dasatinib (<0.1 µM) promote IgE-dependent secretion of histamine in basophils, especially in allergic individuals. In the current study, we asked whether glucocorticosteroids inhibit dasatinib-induced activation of basophils.
Basophils were preincubated with dexamethasone, prednisolone and hydrocortisone for 24 h, and were then exposed to an anti-IgE antibody (normal basophils) or the allergens Bet v 1 and Phl p 5 (allergic patients) with or without low concentrations of dasatinib (0.025 µM). After incubation, basophils were examined for histamine release and expression of CD63 and CD203c.
All three glucocorticosteroids were found to counteract IgE-dependent and dasatinib-enhanced histamine release in basophils in nonallergic and allergic individuals. In addition, glucocorticosteroids were found to inhibit anti-IgE-induced upregulation of CD63 and CD203c in the presence or absence of dasatinib. The inhibitory effects of glucocorticosteroids were dose-dependent (effective range: 1-10 µM) and seen in all donors examined.
Glucocorticosteroids rescue IgE receptor cross-linked basophils from additional costimulatory effects of low-dose dasatinib which may have clinical implications in dasatinib-treated patients.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.22548206
Flow Cytometry-Assisted Basophil Activation Test as a Safe Diagnostic Tool for Aspirin/NSAID Hypersenstivity.
Kim Myung Shin, Cho Young Joo
Allergy, asthma & immunology research
Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ASA/NSAIDs) are common causes of drug hypersensitivity. An oral provocation test is the only definitive diagnostic test. This study assessed the reliability of a flow cytometry-assisted basophil activation test (FAST) as a safe diagnostic method for ASA/NSAID-induced hypersensitivity, as its high sensitivity and specificity have been demonstrated for many other drugs.
Eighteen patients and 11 controls were enrolled. Using a Flow-CAST kit® (Bühlmann Laboratories AG, Schönenbuch, Switzerland), 29 analyses with aspirin, ibuprofen, and diclofenac were performed by flow cytometry to detect double-positive staining of anti-IgE and anti-CD63. The stimulation index was defined as the activated basophil percentage after drug stimulation/basally active basophil percentage. A stimulation index≥2 and an absolute activated basophil percentage≥5 were considered positive.
Patients with hypersensitivity to ASA/NSAIDs were predominantly female, and the prevalence of atopy was higher in patients than in controls. A sensitivity of 61%, specificity of 91%, positive predictive value of 92%, and negative predictive value of 59% were achieved.
FAST is a useful additional method for diagnosis of hypersensitivity reactions to ASA/NSAIDs. Further development is required to increase the sensitivity of the test.22547548
Ehrlichia chaffeensis TRP32 interacts with host cell targets that influence intracellular survival.
Luo Tian, McBride Jere W
Infection and immunity
Ehrlichia chaffeensis is an obligately intracellular bacterium that exhibits tropism for mononuclear phagocytes and survives by evading host cell defense mechanisms. Recently, molecular interactions of E. chaffeensis tandem repeat proteins 47 and 120 (TRP47 and -120) and the eukaryotic host cell have been described. In this investigation, yeast two-hybrid analysis demonstrated that an E. chaffeensis type 1 secretion system substrate, TRP32, interacts with a diverse group of human proteins associated with major biological processes of the host cell, including protein synthesis, trafficking, degradation, immune signaling, cell signaling, iron metabolism, and apoptosis. Eight target proteins, including translation elongation factor 1 alpha 1 (EF1A1), deleted in azoospermia (DAZ)-associated protein 2 (DAZAP2), ferritin light polypeptide (FTL), CD63, CD14, proteasome subunit beta type 1 (PSMB1), ring finger and CCCH-type domain 1 (RC3H1), and tumor protein p53-inducible protein 11 (TP53I11) interacted with TRP32 as determined by coimmunoprecipitation assays, colocalization with TRP32 in HeLa and THP-1 cells, and/or RNA interference. Interactions between TRP32 and host targets localized to the E. chaffeensis morulae or in the host cell cytoplasm adjacent to morulae. Common or closely related interacting partners of E. chaffeensis TRP32, TRP47, and TRP120 demonstrate a molecular convergence on common cellular processes and molecular cross talk between Ehrlichia TRPs and host targets. These findings further support the role of TRPs as effectors that promote intracellular survival.22545106
Effects of DHA-rich n-3 fatty acid supplementation on gene expression in blood mononuclear leukocytes: the OmegAD study.
Vedin Inger, Cederholm Tommy, Freund-Levi Yvonne, Basun Hans, Garlind Anita, Irving Gerd Faxén, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen Maria, Wahlund Lars-Olof, Dahlman Ingrid, Palmblad Jan
PloS one
Dietary fish oil, rich in n-3 fatty acids (n-3 FAs), e.g. docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), regulate inflammatory reactions by various mechanisms, e.g. gene activation. However, the effects of long-term treatment with DHA and EPA in humans, using genome wide techniques, are poorly described. Hence, our aim was to determine the effects of 6 mo of dietary supplementation with an n-3 FA preparation rich in DHA on global gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
In the present study, blood samples were obtained from a subgroup of 16 patients originating from the randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled OmegAD study, where 174 Alzheimer disease (AD) patients received daily either 1.7 g of DHA and 0.6 g EPA or placebo for 6 months. In blood samples obtained from 11 patients receiving n-3 FA and five placebo, expressions of approximately 8000 genes were assessed by gene array. Significant changes were confirmed by real-time PCR. At 6 months, the n-3 FAs group displayed significant rises of DHA and EPA plasma concentrations, as well as up- and down-regulation of nine and ten genes, respectively, was noticed. Many of these genes are involved in inflammation regulation and neurodegeneration, e.g. CD63, MAN2A1, CASP4, LOC399491, NAIP, and SORL1 and in ubiqutination processes, e.g. ANAPC5 and UBE2V1. Down-regulations of ANAPC5 and RHOB correlated to increases of plasma DHA and EPA levels.
We suggest that 6 months of dietary n-3 FA supplementation affected expression of genes that might influence inflammatory processes and could be of significance for AD.
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00211159.22539594
Staphylococcal extracellular adherence protein induces platelet activation by stimulation of thiol isomerases.
Bertling Anne, Niemann Silke, Hussain Muzaffar, Holbrook Lisa, Stanley Ronald G, Brodde Martin F, Pohl Silke, Schifferdecker Tina, Roth Joachim, Jurk Kerstin, Müller Anja, Lahav Judith, Peters Georg, Heilmann Christine, Gibbins Jonathan M, Kehrel Beate E
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology
Staphylococcus aureus can induce platelet aggregation. The rapidity and degree of this correlates with the severity of disseminated intravascular coagulation, and depends on platelet peptidoglycans. Surface-located thiol isomerases play an important role in platelet activation. The staphylococcal extracellular adherence protein (Eap) functions as an adhesin for host plasma proteins. Therefore we tested the effect of Eap on platelets.
We found a strong stimulation of the platelet-surface thiol isomerases protein disulfide isomerase and endoplasmic reticulum stress proteins 57 and 72 by Eap. Eap induced thiol isomerase-dependent glycoprotein IIb/IIIa activation, granule secretion, and platelet aggregation. Treatment of platelets with thiol blockers, bacitracin, and anti-protein disulfide isomerase antibody inhibited Eap-induced platelet activation. The effect of Eap on platelets and protein disulfide isomerase activity was completely blocked by glycosaminoglycans. Inhibition by the hydrophobic probe bis(1-anilinonaphthalene 8-sulfonate) suggested the involvement of hydrophobic sites in protein disulfide isomerase and platelet activation by Eap.
In the present study, we found an additional and yet unknown mechanism of platelet activation by a bacterial adhesin, involving stimulation of thiol isomerases. The thiol isomerase stimulatory and prothrombotic features of a microbial secreted protein are probably not restricted to S aureus and Eap. Because many microorganisms are coated with amyloidogenic proteins, it is likely that the observed mechanism is a more general one.22535767
PTTG-binding factor (PBF) is a novel regulator of the thyroid hormone transporter MCT8.
Smith V E, Read M L, Turnell A S, Sharma N, Lewy G D, Fong J C W, Seed R I, Kwan P, Ryan G, Mehanna H, Chan S Y, Darras V M, Boelaert K, Franklyn J A, McCabe C J
Endocrinology
Within the basolateral membrane of thyroid follicular epithelial cells, two transporter proteins are central to thyroid hormone (TH) biosynthesis and secretion. The sodium iodide symporter (NIS) delivers iodide from the bloodstream into the thyroid, and after TH biosynthesis, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) mediates TH secretion from the thyroid gland. Pituitary tumor-transforming gene-binding factor (PBF; PTTG1IP) is a protooncogene that is up-regulated in thyroid cancer and that binds NIS and modulates its subcellular localization and function. We now show that PBF binds MCT8 in vitro, eliciting a marked shift in MCT8 subcellular localization and resulting in a significant reduction in the amount of MCT8 at the plasma membrane as determined by cell surface biotinylation assays. Colocalization and interaction between PBF and Mct8 was also observed in vivo in a mouse model of thyroid-specific PBF overexpression driven by a bovine thyroglobulin (Tg) promoter (PBF-Tg). Thyroidal Mct8 mRNA and protein expression levels were similar to wild-type mice. Critically, however, PBF-Tg mice demonstrated significantly enhanced thyroidal TH accumulation and reduced TH secretion upon TSH stimulation. Importantly, Mct8-knockout mice share this phenotype. These data show that PBF binds and alters the subcellular localization of MCT8 in vitro, with PBF overexpression leading to an accumulation of TH within the thyroid in vivo. Overall, these studies identify PBF as the first protein to interact with the critical TH transporter MCT8 and modulate its function in vivo. Furthermore, alongside NIS repression, PBF may thus represent a new regulator of TH biosynthesis and secretion.22531012
Low concentration detergent sclerosants induce platelet activation but inhibit aggregation due to suppression of GPIIb/IIIa activation in vitro.
Parsi Kurosh, Connor David E, Pilotelle Anne, Low Joyce, Ma David D F, Joseph Joanne E
Thrombosis research
Sclerotherapy is associated with thromboembolic and ischemic neurological adverse events but the effects of sclerosants on platelet function are unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the in vitro effects of detergent sclerosants Sodium Tetradecyl Sulphate (STS) and Polidocanol (POL) on platelet activation and aggregation.
Whole blood and platelet rich plasma samples were incubated with sclerosants. Platelet and platelet microparticle (PMP) counts were measured by flow cytometry. Platelet activation was examined by ELISA for soluble factors (sP-selectin, von Willebrand factor, sCD40L and serotonin) and by flow cytometry for membrane-bound markers (CD62p, CD63) and cytoplasmic calcium. Platelet aggregation was assessed by PFA-100®, light transmission and impedance (Multiplate®) aggregometry, and by flow cytometry for glycoprotein (GP) Ib and GPIIb/IIIa subunits, heterodimer expression and activation (PAC-1 binding).
Both agents lysed platelets at high concentrations (≥ 0.1%) but induced platelet activation at lower concentrations as evident by a rise in membrane-bound and soluble markers, cytoplasmic calcium and release of phosphatidylserine+PMP. Agonist-stimulated platelet aggregation was inhibited by both sclerosants. Membrane expression of GPIb and GPIIb/IIIa individual subunits or heterodimer was not affected by sclerosants but the activation of GPIIb/IIIa was suppressed.
Low concentration sclerosants activated platelets and released microparticles but inhibited platelet aggregation due to suppression of GPIIb/IIIa activation.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.22469017
Basophil response and the induction of a tolerance in venom immunotherapy: a long-term sting challenge study.
Eržen R, Košnik M, Silar M, Korošec P
Allergy
There is no in vitro test to predict the induction of long-term tolerance in patients treated with venom immunotherapy (VIT). The aim of this study was to investigate whether immunotherapy-induced changes in basophil responsiveness reflect a state of protection and the induction of a tolerance.
Twenty-three patients with allergic reaction after Hymenoptera sting (11 wasp and 12 honeybee) were treated with VIT. In all patients, a CD63 basophil activation test was performed before the beginning of immunotherapy, after 1 year and after completing 4-6.5 years of immunotherapy (approximately 1 year after stopping). The tolerance was then evaluated by a sting challenge test. The basophil activation test was repeated 3-6 months after the challenge.
Twenty-two subjects showed a negative sting challenge, and one subject, a positive sting challenge. Allergen-specific basophil response remained unchanged after 1 year of immunotherapy. However, after immunotherapy, a significant and approximately fourfold decrease was demonstrated in all tolerant subjects mainly in response to submaximal 0.1 μg/ml allergen concentration. This depression was sustained and did not change with the sting challenge test. In a nontolerant patient with a positive sting challenge, basophil response did not change.
Our results suggest that the depression of allergen-specific basophil response seems to be associated with the induction of a tolerance after completing a course of VIT.
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22452313
A rest period does not affect in vitro storage properties in apheresis platelets collected from the buffy coat layer.
Wagner Stephen J, Seetharaman Shalini, Kurtz James
Transfusion
A previous study demonstrated that several in vitro storage properties of apheresis platelets (PLTs) that are isolated by sedimentation against the collection container and subsequently resuspended can benefit from a rest period before continuous agitation. This study examines whether the in vitro storage properties of apheresis PLTs isolated by collection from the buffy coat layer benefit from a rest period before agitation.
Freshly collected apheresis PLTs (Trima, GambroBCT) were divided into five 60-mL aliquots. One aliquot was immediately placed on a flat-bed agitator; the other aliquots were held on a laboratory bench for 1, 2, 4, and 6 hours before continuous agitation. Samples were obtained on Days 1, 5, and 7 for standard in vitro PLT assays. The experiment was repeated 12 times.
For each sampling day, no significant differences were observed in aliquots held with or without a rest period for any of the following PLT properties: PLT content, mean PLT volume, pH, pCO2, bicarbonate, glucose, lactate, hypotonic shock response, extent of shape change, aggregation, morphology, CD62P, CD63, and CD42b. Although regression analysis identified several in vitro properties whose mean levels appeared to improve with increasing length of the rest period, maximum differences in mean levels were small (<6%).
The in vitro storage properties of Trima apheresis PLTs isolated from the buffy coat layer do not benefit from a rest period.
© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.22432913
High basophil allergen sensitivity (CD-sens) is associated with severe allergic asthma in children.
Konradsen Jon R, Nordlund Björn, Nilsson Ola B, van Hage Marianne, Nopp Anna, Hedlin Gunilla, Grönlund Hans
Pediatric allergy and immunology : official publication of the European Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology
Children with problematic severe asthma (PA) have persistent symptoms and/or severe exacerbations despite treatment with several drugs. Classification of asthma severity is currently based on level of treatment and assessment of asthma control, but objective biomarkers of asthma severity are needed. To investigate the clinical relevance of basophil allergen threshold sensitivity (CD-sens) as a measure of allergen sensitivity in a well-characterized cohort of children with different manifestations of persistent allergic asthma. Cat-allergic children (6-18 yr) with problematic severe asthma (n = 11) according to GINA were compared with eleven age-matched children with controlled, but persistent asthma (CA). The protocol included standardized questionnaires, asthma control test (ACT), spirometry, methacholine challenges, measurement of FE(NO,) IgE, cat IgE and IgG antibodies, and analysis of CD-sens (CD63-expression) by flow cytometry. The 11 cat-allergic children with PA had a significantly lower ACT score (p < 0.001), reduced FEV(1) (p = 0.04), and increased numbers of blood eosinophils (p = 0.03) compared with the 11 children with CA. The former exhibited a higher CD-sens to cat (p = 0.02). No significant differences were detected with respect to FE(NO) (p = 0.17), IgE (p = 0.84), cat IgE (p = 0.12), and the major cat-allergen rFel d 1 (p = 0.30). CD-sens significantly correlated with ACT (p = 0.002, r = -0.63) and FE(NO) (p = 0.01, r = 0.55). No significant differences between PA and CA were found regarding IgG antibodies to rFel d 1. Cat-allergic children with problematic severe asthma have higher sensitivity to cat allergen, as measured by CD-sens, compared with children with controlled asthma. This suggests that CD-sens could be used as an additional marker for identifying children with the most severe allergic asthma.
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22425483
Primary nasal mucosal melanoma in Brazil: clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 12 patients.
Benevenuto de Andrade Bruno Augusto, Piña Alicia Rumayor, León Jorge Esquiche, Paes de Almeida Oslei, Altemani Albina
Annals of diagnostic pathology
Primary nasal melanoma is a rare tumor of unknown etiopathogenesis that occurs in adult and elderly patients usually diagnosed at advanced stages. The aim of this study was to analyze the clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical characteristics of 12 cases of primary nasal melanomas in Brazil. Twelve cases of primary nasal melanoma were analyzed histologically and by immunohistochemistry using the antibodies S-100 protein, HMB-45, Melan-A, CD63 (NKI/C3), CD68/KP1, fatty acid synthase (FASN), and Ki-67. The mean age of the patients was 60 years, and 7 of 12 patients were men. Microscopically, 10 cases presented level III of invasion; 4 were amelanotic; and in 7, cells were epithelioid. S-100 protein and FASN were positive in all cases, whereas 9, 8, 7, and 6 cases were positive for HMB-45, Melan-A, CD63 (NKI/C3), and CD68/KP1, respectively. Ki-67 labeling index ranged from 11.45% to 28.5% of positive cells. S-100 protein is more frequently expressed in nasal melanomas than in HMB-45, Melan-A, CD63 (NKI/C3), and CD68/KP1. FASN seems to be involved in the pathogenesis of nasal melanomas, and also, it can be helpful to confirm the diagnosis.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.22424855
Multicolor flow cytometry for evaluation of platelet surface antigens and activation markers.
van Velzen Jeroen F, Laros-van Gorkom Britta A P, Pop Gheorghe A M, van Heerde Waander L
Thrombosis research
Flow cytometry allows the analysis of multiple antigens in a single tube at a single cell level. We present a rapid and sensitive two tube flow cytometric protocol for the detection of multiple platelet antigens and activation markers gated on a pure platelet population.
The presence of platelet specific antigens was analyzed in citrated whole blood of normal platelets and from patients diagnosed with platelet abnormalities. Quiescent platelets as well as stimulated platelets were analyzed using a gating strategy based on ubiquitously expressed platelet membrane markers. A ubiquitously expressed platelet marker was combined with antibodies against the activated alpha2b-beta3 (PAC-1), Lysosomal Activated Membrane Protein (CD63) and P-selectin (CD62P).
We were able to detect the platelet antigens CD36, CD41, CD42a, CD42b and CD61 in one single tube. Our approach allowed the single tube determination of PAC-1, CD63 and CD62P after activation of platelets by thrombin, collagen, ADP and PAR-1, and determination of platelet abnormalities.
Our two tube multi-parameter screening protocol is suited for the analysis of platelet antigens expressed on quiescent and activated platelets and allows the detection of aberrancies as found in blood of patients with thrombocytopathy such as Glanzmann Thrombasthenia, storage pool disease with diminished granule content and patients treated with clopidogrel and acetylsalicylic acid.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.22421265
Double positivity to bee and wasp venom: improved diagnostic procedure by recombinant allergen-based IgE testing and basophil activation test including data about cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants.
Eberlein Bernadette, Krischan Lilian, Darsow Ulf, Ollert Markus, Ring Johannes
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Specific IgE (sIgE) antibodies to both bee and wasp venom can be due to a sensitivity to both insect venoms or due to cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants (CCDs).
Investigating whether a basophil activation test (BAT) with both venoms as well as with bromelain and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) or recombinant allergen-based IgE testing can improve the diagnostic procedure.
Twenty-two Hymenoptera-venom allergic patients with sIgE antibodies to both bee and wasp venom were studied. sIgE antibodies to MUXF3 CCD, bromelain, HRP, rApi m 1, and rVes v 5 were determined, and a BAT (Flow2 CAST) with venom extracts, bromelain, and HRP was performed. Further recombinant allergen-based IgE testing was done by using an ELISA, if required. The reactivity of basophils was calculated from the insect venom concentration at half-maximum stimulation.
Double positivity/double negativity/single positivity to rApi m 1 and rVes v 5 was seen in 12/1/9 patients. Further recombinant allergen-based IgE testing in the last ones revealed positive results to the other venom in all cases except one. BAT was double positive/double negative/single positive in 6/2/14 patients. Four patients with negative results in sIgE antibodies to CCDs had positive results in BAT. BAT with bromelain/HRP showed a sensitivity of 50%/81% and a specificity of 91%/90%.
Component-resolved IgE testing elucidates the pattern of double positivity, showing a majority of true double sensitizations independent of CCD sensitization. BAT seems to add more information about the culprit insect even if the true clinical relevance of BAT is not completely determined because of ethical limitations on diagnostic sting challenges. BAT with HRP is a good method to determine sensitivity to CCDs.
Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.22409922
[Effects of the Chinese patent medicine, Honghua Injection, on platelet glycoprotein IIb/III a receptors in patients with acute coronary syndrome: a randomized controlled trial].
Zhu Yan-feng, Luo Hai-ming, Deng Zhong-long, Fu De-yu, Yao Wang, Dai Jian
Zhong xi yi jie he xue bao = Journal of Chinese integrative medicine
Glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa is an important index for assessing the function of platelets. To investigate the effects of Honghua Injection, a Chinese patent medicine made from extracts of Carthamus tinctorius L, on GP IIb/IIIa is a key study in evaluating the inhibition properties of Honghua Injection on platelet aggregation.
To observe the effects of Honghua Injection on platelet GPIIb/IIIa receptors and explore the mechanisms of Honghua Injection in inhibiting platelet aggregation in patients with acute coronary syndrome.
A total of 64 patients from Yueyang Hospital of Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine were randomly divided into Honghua Injection group (n=32, routine Western medicine plus Honghua Injection) and control group (n=32, routine Western medicine) according to the random number table. The patients were treated for 14 d.
The expressions of GPIIb/IIIa (CD41), P-selection (CD62p), and lysosome-associated membrane GP (CD63) were measured by flow cytometry before and after treatment. Meanwhile the therapeutic effects of Huonghua Injection on angina and short-term prognosis were observed.
The observational period was 14 d and four patients in the control group were omitted due to early discharge. The expression of CD41 in both the Honghua Injection group and the control group was inhibited after treatment (P<0.05, P<0.01). The inhibition of the Honghua Injection group was stronger than that of the control group (P<0.05). There was no case of death, myocardial infarction and cerebral apoplexy during 14 d of treatment. The improvement of angina symptoms and electrocardiographic manifestation in the Honghua Injection group was greater than that of the control group (P<0.05).
Honghua Injection can inhibit the expression of GP IIb/IIIa receptors by preventing aggregation of platelets and may be considered as an effective traditional Chinese medicine for acute coronary syndrome.22379608
A case of korean ginseng-induced anaphylaxis confirmed by open oral challenge and basophil activation test.
Lee Jae-Young, Jin Hyun Jung, Park Jung-Won, Jung Soon Kwang, Jang Jeng-Yun, Park Hae-Sim
Allergy, asthma & immunology research
Two case reports discussing Korean ginseng-induced allergic reactions have been published; both were inhalation-induced respiratory allergies in occupational settings. In this report we discuss the first case of anaphylaxis that developed after an oral intake of ginseng, confirmed by an open oral challenge, a skin prick test (SPT), and a basophil activation test (BAT). A 44-year-old man experienced rhinorrhea and nasal stiffness, followed by respiratory difficulty with wheeze and abdominal pain 10 minutes after oral intake of fresh ginseng. He had suffered from episodes of allergic rhinitis during the spring season for several years. Upon presentation, a physical examination, chest radiograph, and routine laboratory tests were unremarkable. Total serum IgE level was 41 IU/mL. The SPT results showed strong positive responses to alder, birch pollens, and ginseng extracts (1:500 w/v). The methacholine bronchial challenge test revealed a positive result at PC20 of 5.83 mg/mL. The open oral challenge was performed using 50 g of fresh ginseng and showed immediate onset of facial flushing, cough, respiratory difficulty with wheeze, and abdominal pain combined with a significant decrease in FEV1 levels (54% from the baseline). Serum-specific IgE and IgG4 antibodies were not detectable by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. BAT showed a remarkable increase in the expression of CD203c and CD63 with the addition of ginseng extract in a dose-dependent manner, while no changes were noted in the controls. In conclusion, oral intake of Korean ginseng could induce anaphylaxis, which is mediated by non-IgE-dependent direct activation of basophil/mast cells.22350221
Modulation of mTOR effector phosphoproteins in blood basophils from allergic patients.
Gernez Yael, Tirouvanziam Rabindra, Reshamwala Neha, Yu Grace, Weldon Brittany C, Galli Stephen J, Herzenberg Leonore A, Nadeau Kari C
Journal of clinical immunology
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway contributes to various immunoinflammatory processes. Yet, its potential involvement in basophil responses in allergy remains unclear. In this pilot study, we quantified two key mTOR effector phosphoproteins, the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (peIF4E) and S6 ribosomal protein (pS6rp), in blood basophils from nut allergy patients (NA, N = 16) and healthy controls (HC, N = 13). Without stimulation in vitro, basophil peIF4E levels were higher in NA than HC subjects (P = 0.014). Stimulation with nut (offending) but not chicken / rice (non-offending) extract increased basophil peIF4E and pS6rp levels (+32%, P = 0.018, and +98%, P = 0.0026, respectively) in NA but not HC subjects, concomitant with increased surface levels of CD203c and CD63, both known to reflect basophil activation. Pre-treatment with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin decreased pS6rp and CD203c responses in nut extract-stimulated basophils in NA subjects. Thus, basophil responses to offending allergens are associated with modulation of mTOR effector phosphoproteins.22340691
The myxovirus-resistance protein, MX1, is a component of exosomes secreted by uterine epithelial cells.
Racicot Karen, Schmitt Anthony, Ott Troy
American journal of reproductive immunology (New York, N.Y. : 1989)
PROBLEM: Dairy cattle suffer from high percentages of early embryonic loss, and therefore, it is critical to study the function of the uterus at this time. We hypothesize that the antiviral protein, myxovirus resistance (MX)1, regulates secretion in uterine glandular cells during early pregnancy. METHOD OF STUDY: Uterine epithelial cells were used to study uterine function, in vitro. Sucrose gradients, Western blotting, and transmission electron microscopy were used to isolate and identify exosomes. Immunofluorescence and ceramide inhibitors were used for the characterization of exosomes. RESULTS: Myxovirus resistance1 was associated with exosomes and protected from proteases, indicating it was inside exosomes. MX1 partially colocalized with exosomal protein CD63, and a ceramide inhibitor reduced numbers of MX1-associated exosomes. CONCLUSION: This study is the first to characterize MX1-associated exosomes, and we postulate that MX1 regulates secretion in epithelial cells by playing a role in exosome formation or trafficking.
© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22327365
Reduced cell proliferation by IKK2 depletion in a mouse lung-cancer model.
Xia Yifeng, Yeddula Narayana, Leblanc Mathias, Ke Eugene, Zhang Yonghui, Oldfield Eric, Shaw Reuben J, Verma Inder M
Nature cell biology
Lung cancer is one of the leading cancer malignancies, with a five-year survival rate of only ~15%. We have developed a lentiviral-vector-mediated mouse model, which enables generation of non-small-cell lung cancer from less than 100 alveolar epithelial cells, and investigated the role of IKK2 and NF-κB in lung-cancer development. IKK2 depletion in tumour cells significantly attenuated tumour proliferation and significantly prolonged mouse survival. We identified Timp1, one of the NF-κB target genes, as a key mediator for tumour growth. Activation of the Erk signalling pathway and cell proliferation requires Timp-1 and its receptor CD63. Knockdown of either Ikbkb or Timp1 by short hairpin RNAs reduced tumour growth in both xenograft and lentiviral models. Our results thus suggest the possible application of IKK2 and Timp-1 inhibitors in treating lung cancer.22302999
Dynamics within tetraspanin pairs affect MHC class II expression.
Hoorn Tineke van den, Paul Petra, Janssen Lennert, Janssen Hans, Neefjes Jacques
Journal of cell science
Late endosomal multivesicular bodies (MVBs) are complicated organelles with various subdomains located at the limiting membrane and the internal vesicles (ILVs). ILVs accumulate tetraspanins such as CD63 and CD82 that might form protein assemblies, including major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) and its chaperone human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DM. Here, we studied the effect of four late endosomal tetraspanin proteins on MHC-II expression. Silencing CD9, CD63 and CD81 enhanced MHC-II expression whereas silencing CD82 did not. No effect on peptide loading was observed. Using confocal FRET technology, we measured the dynamics of CD63 and CD82 interaction with MHC-II and its chaperone HLA-DM. CD63-CD82 interactions remained unaltered in the two MVB subdomains whereas the interactions between CD63 or CD82 homologous pairs changed. CD63 stably associated with MHC-II, and CD82 with HLA-DM, on both MVB subdomains whereas the CD82-MHC-II and CD63-HLA-DM interactions changed. These data visualize for the first time the protein dynamics of tetraspanin assemblies in MVB subdomains. CD63, unlike CD82, stably interacts with MHC-II at both MVB subdomains and controls MHC-II expression.22299028
The PI3-kinase/mTOR-targeting drug NVP-BEZ235 inhibits growth and IgE-dependent activation of human mast cells and basophils.
Blatt Katharina, Herrmann Harald, Mirkina Irina, Hadzijusufovic Emir, Peter Barbara, Strommer Sabine, Hoermann Gregor, Mayerhofer Matthias, Hoetzenecker Konrad, Klepetko Walter, Ghanim Viviane, Marth Katharina, Füreder Thorsten, Wacheck Volker, Valenta Rudolf, Valent Peter
PloS one
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) are two major signaling molecules involved in growth and activation of mast cells (MC) and basophils (BA). We examined the effects of the dual PI3-kinase/mTOR blocker NVP-BEZ235 on growth of normal and neoplastic BA and MC as well as immunoglobulin E (IgE)-dependent cell activation. Growth of MC and BA were determined by measuring (3)H-thymidine uptake and apoptosis. Cell activation was determined in histamine release experiments and by measuring upregulation of CD63 and CD203c after challenging with IgE plus anti-IgE or allergen. We found that NVP-BEZ235 exerts profound inhibitory effects on growth of primary and cloned neoplastic MC. In the MC leukemia cell line HMC-1, NVP-BEZ235 showed similar IC(50) values in the HMC-1.1 subclone lacking KIT D816V (0.025 µM) and the HMC-1.2 subclone expressing KIT D816V (0.005 µM). Moreover, NVP-BEZ235 was found to exert strong growth-inhibitory effects on neoplastic MC in a xenotransplant-mouse model employing NMR1-Foxn1(nu) mice. NVP-BEZ235 also exerted inhibitory effects on cytokine-dependent differentiation of normal BA and MC, but did not induce growth inhibition or apoptosis in mature MC or normal bone marrow cells. Finally, NVP-BEZ235 was found to inhibit IgE-dependent histamine release in BA and MC (IC(50) 0.5-1 µM) as well as anti-IgE-induced upregulation of CD203c in BA and IgE-dependent upregulation of CD63 in MC. In summary, NVP-BEZ235 produces growth-inhibitory effects in immature neoplastic MC and inhibits IgE-dependent activation of mature BA and MC. Whether these potentially beneficial drug effects have clinical implications is currently under investigation.22271903
Altered immunophenotypic features of peripheral blood platelets in myelodysplastic syndromes.
Sandes Alex F, Yamamoto Mihoko, Matarraz Sergio, Chauffaille Maria de Lourdes L F, Quijano Sandra, López Antonio, Oguro Tsutomu, Kimura Eliza Y S, Orfao Alberto
Haematologica
Multiparameter flow cytometric analysis of bone marrow and peripheral blood cells has proven to be of help in the diagnostic workup of myelodysplastic syndromes. However, the usefulness of flow cytometry for the detection of megakaryocytic and platelet dysplasia has not yet been investigated. The aim of this pilot study was to evaluate by flow cytometry the diagnostic and prognostic value of platelet dysplasia in myelodysplastic syndromes.
We investigated the pattern of expression of distinct surface glycoproteins on peripheral blood platelets from a series of 44 myelodysplastic syndrome patients, 20 healthy subjects and 19 patients with platelet alterations associated to disease conditions other than myelodysplastic syndromes. Quantitative expression of CD31, CD34, CD36, CD41a, CD41b, CD42a, CD42b and CD61 glycoproteins together with the PAC-1, CD62-P, fibrinogen and CD63 platelet activation-associated markers and platelet light scatter properties were systematically evaluated.
Overall, flow cytometry identified multiple immunophenotypic abnormalities on platelets of myelodysplastic syndrome patients, including altered light scatter characteristics, over-and under expression of specific platelet glycoproteins and asynchronous expression of CD34; decreased expression of CD36 (n = 5), CD42a (n = 1) and CD61 (n = 2), together with reactivity for CD34 (n = 1) were only observed among myelodysplastic syndrome cases, while other alterations were also found in other platelet disorders. Based on the overall platelet alterations detected for each patient, an immunophenotypic score was built which identified a subgroup of myelodysplastic syndrome patients with a high rate of moderate to severe alterations (score>1.5; n = 16) who more frequently showed thrombocytopenia, megakaryocytic dysplasia and high-risk disease, together with a shorter overall survival.
Our results show the presence of altered phenotypes by flow cytometry on platelets from around half of the myelodysplastic syndrome patients studied. If confirmed in larger series of patients, these findings may help refine the diagnostic and prognostic assessment of this group of disorders.22269476
Basophil activation test in allergy: time for an update?
Chirumbolo Salvatore
International archives of allergy and immunology
A wide range of reported evidence in the literature has shown that the quantification of basophil activation by flow cytometry (basophil activation test, BAT) has proven to be a useful tool for the assessment of immediate-type responses to allergens mediated by IgE or other mechanisms in allergic patients. The usefulness of BAT in anaphylactic adverse reactions, late-onset allergy and immunotherapy follow-up has also been demonstrated. To date, most BAT studies reported in the literature involved the capture of basophils only with a fluorochrome-labeled anti-IgE antibody and application of CD63 upregulation in order to evaluate the basophil response to allergens. Many issues need to be addressed, such as optimizing the analytical performance of the test, checking preanalytical conditions, the selection of the flow cytometry best gating protocol, the introduction of new algorithms and parameters, the search for new activation markers and the introduction of anti-IgE controls. BAT is certainly a useful technique, also for isolated cases of hypersensitivity to various other compounds and drugs, and an update of its application is certainly an interesting topic to expand the debate on allergy diagnosis.
Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.22243256
Structure and function of ameloblastin as an extracellular matrix protein: adhesion, calcium binding, and CD63 interaction in human and mouse.
Zhang Xu, Diekwisch Thomas G H, Luan Xianghong
European journal of oral sciences
The functional significance of extracellular matrix proteins in the life of vertebrates is underscored by a high level of sequence variability in tandem with a substantial degree of conservation in terms of cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion interactions. Many extracellular matrix proteins feature multiple adhesion domains for successful attachment to substrates, such as integrin, CD63, and heparin. Here we have used homology and ab initio modeling algorithms to compare mouse ameloblastin (mAMBN) and human ameloblastin (hABMN) isoforms and to analyze their potential for cell adhesion and interaction with other matrix molecules as well as calcium binding. Sequence comparison between mAMBN and hAMBN revealed a 26-amino-acid deletion in mAMBN, corresponding to a helix-loop-helix frameshift. The human AMBN domain (174Q-201G), homologous to the mAMBN 157E-178I helix-loop-helix region, formed a helix-loop motif with an extended loop, suggesting a higher degree of flexibility of hAMBN compared with mAMBN, as confirmed by molecular dynamics simulation. Heparin-binding domains, CD63-interaction domains, and calcium-binding sites in both hAMBN and mAMBN support the concept of AMBN as an extracellular matrix protein. The high level of conservation between AMBN functional domains related to adhesion and differentiation was remarkable when compared with only 61% amino acid sequence homology.
© 2011 Eur J Oral Sci.22226550
2-Aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB) reduces alkaline phosphatase release, CD63 expression, F-actin polymerization and chemotaxis without affecting the phagocytosis activity in bovine neutrophils.
Conejeros I, Velásquez Z D, Carretta M D, Alarcón P, Hidalgo M A, Burgos R A
Veterinary immunology and immunopathology
2-Aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB) interferes with the Ca(2+) influx and reduces the ROS production, gelatinase secretion and CD11b expression in bovine neutrophils. Moreover, it has been suggested that inhibition of the Ca(2+) channel involved in the store operated Ca(2+) entry (SOCE) is a potential target for the development of new anti-inflammatory drugs in cattle, however it is unknown whether 2-APB affects neutrophil functions associated with the innate immune response. This study describes the effect of 2-APB, a putative SOCE inhibitor, on alkaline phosphatase activity a marker of secretory vesicles, CD63 a marker for azurophil granules, F-actin polymerization and in vitro chemotaxis in bovine neutrophils stimulated with platelet-activating factor (PAF). Also, we evaluated the effect of 2-APB in the phagocytic activity against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus bioparticles. We observed that doses of 2-APB ≥10 μM significantly reduced alkaline phosphatase activity and in vitro chemotaxis, whereas concentrations of 2-APB ≥50 μM reduced CD63 expression and F-actin polymerization. Finally, we observed that 2-APB did not affect the phagocytic activity in neutrophils incubated with E. coli and S. aureus bioparticles. We concluded that inhibition of Ca(2+) influx could be a useful strategy to reduce inflammatory process in cattle.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.22223664
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) regulates mesenchymal stem cells through let-7f microRNA and Wnt/β-catenin signaling.
Egea Virginia, Zahler Stefan, Rieth Nicole, Neth Peter, Popp Tanja, Kehe Kai, Jochum Marianne, Ries Christian
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1 (TIMP-1) is a matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-independent regulator of growth and apoptosis in various cell types. The receptors and signaling pathways that are involved in the growth factor activities of TIMP-1, however, remain controversial. RNA interference of TIMP-1 has revealed that endogenous TIMP-1 suppresses the proliferation, metabolic activity, and osteogenic differentiation capacity of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). The knockdown of TIMP-1 in hMSCs activated the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway as indicated by the increased stability and nuclear localization of β-catenin in TIMP-1-deficient hMSCs. Moreover, TIMP-1 knockdown cells exhibited enhanced β-catenin transcriptional activity, determined by Wnt/β-catenin target gene expression analysis and a luciferase-based β-catenin-activated reporter assay. An analysis of a mutant form of TIMP-1 that cannot inhibit MMP indicated that the effect of TIMP-1 on β-catenin signaling is MMP independent. Furthermore, the binding of CD63 to TIMP-1 on the surface of hMSCs is essential for the TIMP-1-mediated effects on Wnt/β-catenin signaling. An array analysis of microRNAs (miRNAs) and transfection studies with specific miRNA inhibitors and mimics showed that let-7f miRNA is crucial for the regulation of β-catenin activity and osteogenic differentiation by TIMP-1. Let-7f was up-regulated in TIMP-1-depleted hMSCs and demonstrably reduced axin 2, an antagonist of β-catenin stability. Our results demonstrate that TIMP-1 is a direct regulator of hMSC functions and reveal a regulatory network in which let-7f modulates Wnt/β-catenin activity.22205176
Monitoring of CD63% in basophil activation test and suggested new parameters for allergy diagnosis.
Chirumbolo Salvatore
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
22203761
Activation of peripheral-blood granulocytes is strongly correlated with patient outcome after immunotherapy with anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.
Cheung Irene Y, Hsu Katharine, Cheung Nai-Kong V
Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology
Adjuvant therapy using anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has shown treatment success for patients with high-risk neuroblastoma (NB). Although there is ample evidence on how the antibody targets NB, in vivo contribution by GM-CSF remains unclear. This report investigates granulocyte activation and its correlation with treatment outcome.
Patients enrolled onto NCT00072358 received multiple treatment cycles, each consisting of anti-GD2 antibody 3F8 plus subcutaneous (SC) GM-CSF. Peripheral-blood (PB) samples from 151 patients were collected on day 0 and day 4 of cycle 1. PB from a subgroup of 35 patients had intravenous (IV) instead of SC GM-CSF during cycle 4. Samples were analyzed by flow cytometry for CD11a, CD63, CD87, and CD11b and its activation epitope CBRM1/5.
Comparing cycle 1 day 4 PB samples with day 0 PB samples, five of five activation marker-positive granulocytes were significantly higher. The change in frequency and mean fluorescence intensity of CBRM1/5-positive granulocytes correlated with progression-free survival (PFS; P = .024 and P = .008, respectively). A multivariable analysis identified increasing CBRM1/5-positive granulocytes and missing killer immunoglobulin-like receptor ligand as positive independent prognostic factors for PFS, whereas second-line cyclophosphamide-based therapy before protocol entry negatively influenced outcome. Thirty-five patients who received SC GM-CSF at cycle 1 and IV GM-CSF at cycle 4 had significantly less CBRM1/5 activation after IV GM-CSF. In contrast, 63 patients who received SC GM-CSF at both cycles had comparable CBRM1/5 activation.
GM-CSF-induced granulocyte activation in vivo is associated with improved patient outcome. This activation was more apparent when GM-CSF was given by the SC route instead of IV route.22202123
O-antigen-deficient Francisella tularensis Live Vaccine Strain mutants are ingested via an aberrant form of looping phagocytosis and show altered kinetics of intracellular trafficking in human macrophages.
Clemens Daniel L, Lee Bai-Yu, Horwitz Marcus A
Infection and immunity
We examined the uptake and intracellular trafficking of F. tularensis Live Vaccine Strain (LVS) and LVS with disruptions of wbtDEF and wbtI genes essential for synthesis of the O antigen of lipopolysaccharide. Unlike parental bacteria, O-antigen-deficient LVS is efficiently killed by serum with intact complement but not by serum lacking terminal complement components. Opsonization of O-antigen-deficient LVS in serum lacking terminal complement components allows efficient uptake of these live bacteria by macrophages. In the presence of complement, whereas parental F. tularensis LVS is internalized within spacious pseudopod loops, mutant LVS is internalized within tightly juxtaposed multiple onion-like layers of pseudopodia. Without complement, both parental and mutant LVSs are internalized within spacious pseudopod loops. Thus, molecules other than O antigen are important in triggering dramatic pseudopod extensions and uptake by spacious pseudopod loops. Following uptake, both parental and mutant LVSs enter compartments that show limited staining for the lysosomal membrane glycoprotein CD63 and little fusion with secondary lysosomes. Subsequently, both parental and mutant LVSs lose their CD63 staining. Whereas the majority of parental LVS escapes into the cytosol by 6 h after uptake, mutant LVS shows a marked lag but does escape by 1 day after uptake. Despite the altered kinetics of phagosome escape, both mutant and parental strains grow to high levels within human macrophages. Thus, the O antigen plays a role in the morphology of uptake in the presence of complement and the kinetics of intracellular growth but is not essential for escape, survival, altered membrane trafficking, or intramacrophage growth.22187572
Comparison of CD63 Upregulation Induced by NSAIDs on Basophils and Monocytes in Patients with NSAID Hypersensitivity.
Abuaf N, Rostane H, Barbara J, Toly-Ndour C, Gaouar H, Mathelier-Fusade P, Leynadier F, Francès C, Girot R
Journal of allergy
Background. An in vitro basophil activation test, based on the detection of CD63 upregulation induced by NSAIDs, has been described. Its clinical significance remains controversial. Objectives. In patients with a history of nonallergic NSAID hypersensitivity, stratified according to the severity of the symptoms, to assess with NSAIDs the predictive value of basophil (BAT) and monocyte (MAT) activation tests. Patients/Methods. Sixty patients who had NSAIDs-induced or exacerbated urticaria/angiooedema and 20 controls was included. After incubation with NSAIDs or acetaminophen, leukocytes were analysed for CD63 upregulation. Results. With aspirin, the sensitivity (37%) and specificity (90%) of BAT agree with already published results. In contrast, when patients had had cutaneous and visceral reactions, the frequency of positive BAT 14/22 (64%, P < 0.001) or MAT 10/22 (46%, P < 0.01) were increased. Conclusions. Positive tests were more frequent among patients having a severe hypersensitivity contrasting with the other patients who had results similar to controls.22178636
Modulation of basophil activity: a novel function of the neuropeptide α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone.
Böhm Markus, Apel Mara, Sugawara Koji, Brehler Randolf, Jurk Kerstin, Luger Thomas A, Haas Helmut, Paus Ralf, Eiz-Vesper Britta, Walls Andrew F, Ponimaskin Evgeni, Gehring Manuela, Kapp Alexander, Raap Ulrike
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Little is known about the effect of neuropeptides on basophils, which are important effector cells in immune and allergic responses.
This study aimed at revealing the role of α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) on basophil function.
Expression of melanocortin receptors and proopiomelanocortin (POMC) was analyzed by means of RT-PCR, Western immunoblotting, fluorescence-activated cell sorting, and double-immunofluorescence analysis. Signal transduction studies included cyclic AMP and Ca(2+) mobilization assays. Basophil activity was assessed based on CD63 surface expression and cytokine release.
MC-1R expression was detectable in basophils isolated from human peripheral blood, as well as in basophils within nasal tissue. In isolated basophils from human blood, truncated POMC transcripts were present, but there was no POMC protein. Treatment of basophils with α-MSH increased intracellular Ca(2+) but not cyclic AMP levels. α-MSH at physiologic doses potently suppressed basophil activation induced by N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, or grass pollen allergen in whole blood of healthy or allergic subjects, respectively. The effect of α-MSH on basophil activation was MC-1R mediated (as shown by blockade with a peptide analogue of agouti-signaling protein) and imitated by adrenocorticotropic hormone but not elicited by the tripeptides KPV and KdPT, both of which lack the central pharmacophore of α-MSH. Moreover, α-MSH at physiologic doses significantly suppressed secretion of 3 proallergic cytokines, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-13, in basophils stimulated with anti-IgE, N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine, or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate.
Our findings highlight a novel functional activity of α-MSH, which acts as a natural antiallergic basophil-response modifier. These findings might point to novel therapeutic strategies in treating allergic diseases.
Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.22173928
CD300a is expressed on human basophils and seems to inhibit IgE/FcεRI-dependent anaphylactic degranulation.
Sabato Vito, Verweij Marjoke M, Bridts Chris H, Levi-Schaffer Francesca, Gibbs Bernhard F, De Clerck Luc S, Schiavino Domenico, Ebo Didier G
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
The final response that leads to basophil degranulation results from a cross-talk between activatory and inhibitory signals. However, in the context of basophil biology, the inhibitory mechanisms that control these processes are still poorly understood.
To investigate the expression and function of the inhibitory receptor CD300a in human basophils.
Peripheral blood of 20 patients with birch pollen allergy and 10 healthy control individuals were assessed for CD300a expression before and after activation. To study the function of CD300a, basophils were pre-incubated with anti-human CD300a/c monoclonal antibodies and analyzed for the up-regulation of the activation marker CD203c and appearance of the degranulation marker CD63 following IgE-dependent and IgE-independent triggering.
Basophils from allergic individuals constitutively expressed significantly less CD300a than non-allergics (P = 0.001). However, after cross-linking with either anti-IgE or recombinant major birch pollen allergen (rBet v 1), basophils from allergic patients demonstrated a significant and rapid (3 min) up-regulation of CD300a expression in all activated basophils that persisted for over 2 h (P < 0.05). Moreover, CD300a expression was significantly higher in the CD203c(bright+) CD63(bright+) subpopulation than in CD203c(bright+) CD63(-) cells (P < 0.05). In both patients and controls, pre-incubation with anti-CD300a/c significantly inhibited IgE-mediated CD63 expression (P < 0.05), though it did not affect CD203c. In contrast, IgE-independent basophil activation was not inhibited by CD300a/c engagement.
CD300a is expressed on human peripheral blood basophils and rapidly up-regulated upon cross-linking of IgE/FcεRI and suppresses anaphylactic degranulation.
Copyright © 2011 International Clinical Cytometry Society.22162266
Molecular and immunological characterization of Mus a 5 allergen from banana fruit.
Aleksic Ivana, Popovic Milica, Dimitrijevic Rajna, Andjelkovic Uros, Vassilopoulou Emilia, Sinaniotis Athanassios, Atanaskovic-Markovic Marina, Lindner Buko, Petersen Arnd, Papadopoulos Nikolaos G, Gavrovic-Jankulovic Marija
Molecular nutrition & food research
Banana fruit has become an important cause of fruit allergy in the recent years. Among the five registered IUIS allergens, Mus a 1 and Mus a 2 have been characterized in detail. In this study, molecular characterization and evaluation of the allergenic properties of β-1,3-glucanase from banana (Musa acuminata), denoted as Mus a 5, were performed.
The gene of Mus a 5 was cloned and sequenced. The obtained cDNA revealed a novel Mus a 5 isoform with an open reading frame encoding a protein of 340 amino acids comprising a putative signal peptide of 28 amino acid residues. By MALDI-TOF analysis Mus a 5 isolated from banana fruit revealed a molecular mass of 33451±67 Da. Two Mus a 5 isoforms (pI 7.7 and 8.0) were detected by 2D immunoblot with an identical N-terminal sequence. By mass fingerprint, 76 and 83% of the primary structure was confirmed for the two mature Mus a 5 isoforms, respectively. IgE reactivity to Mus a 5 was found in 74% of patients sensitized to banana fruit. Upregulation of basophil activation markers CD63 and CD203c was achieved with Mus a 5 in a concentration-dependent manner.
Mus a 5 is a functional allergen and a candidate for the component-resolved allergy diagnosis of banana allergy.
Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.22148876
Proteomic analysis of microvesicles derived from human mesenchymal stem cells.
Kim Han-Soo, Choi Do-Young, Yun So Jeong, Choi Seong-Mi, Kang Jeong Won, Jung Jin Woo, Hwang Daehee, Kim Kwang Pyo, Kim Dong-Wook
Journal of proteome research
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have emerged as a promising means for treating degenerative or incurable diseases. Recent studies have shown that microvesicles (MVs) from MSCs (MSC-MVs) contribute to recovery of damaged tissues in animal disease models. Here, we profiled the MSC-MV proteome to investigate their therapeutic effects. LC-MS/MS analysis of MSC-MVs identified 730 MV proteins. The MSC-MV proteome included five positive and two variable known markers of MSCs, but no negative marker, as well as 43 surface receptors and signaling molecules controlling self-renewal and differentiation of MSCs. Functional enrichment analysis showed that cellular processes represented by the MSC-MV proteins include cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, and morphogenesis. Integration of MSC's self-renewal and differentiation-related genes and the proteome of MSC-conditioned media (MSC-CM) with the MSC-MV proteome revealed potential MV protein candidates that can be associated with the therapeutic effects of MSC-MVs: (1) surface receptors (PDGFRB, EGFR, and PLAUR); (2) signaling molecules (RRAS/NRAS, MAPK1, GNA13/GNG12, CDC42, and VAV2); (3) cell adhesion (FN1, EZR, IQGAP1, CD47, integrins, and LGALS1/LGALS3); and (4) MSC-associated antigens (CD9, CD63, CD81, CD109, CD151, CD248, and CD276). Therefore, the MSC-MV proteome provides a comprehensive basis for understanding the potential of MSC-MVs to affect tissue repair and regeneration.22138708
Inhibition or deficiency of cathepsin B leads defects in HIV-1 Gag pseudoparticle release in macrophages and HEK293T cells.
Ha Soon-Duck, Park Sangwook, Hattlmann Clayton James, Barr Stephen Dominic, Kim Sung Ouk
Antiviral research
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) egresses from infected cells through utilizing the host membrane budding mechanisms. Assembly of HIV-1 Gag particles occurs on membranes where the Gag multimers subsequently bud off and form enveloped viral particles. In certain cell types such as macrophages, HIV-1 Gag particles have shown to be released into intracellular virus containing compartments (VCC) such as late endosomes, multivesicular bodies (MVBs) or invaginated plasma membrane pockets. Here, we showed that macrophages or HEK293T cells treated with the cathepsin B (CTSB)-specific inhibitor CA-074Me or cells deficient in CTSB failed to release HIV-1 Gag pseudoparticles into the extracellular environment. Based on immunofluorescence and electron microscopy, these cells retained the pseudoparticles in heterogeneous intracellular VCC. CA-074Me was also able to inhibit propagation of two enveloped viruses, herpes simplex virus and influenza A virus, but not non-enveloped enterovirus. These results suggest that CTSB is required for the efficient release of HIV-1 Gag pseudoparticles and targeting CTSB can be a new therapeutic strategy for inhibiting egress of HIV-1 and other enveloped viruses.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.22136583
Monitoring honeybee venom immunotherapy in children with the basophil activation test.
Žitnik Simona E K, Vesel Tina, Avčin Tadej, Šilar Mira, Košnik Mitja, Korošec Peter
Pediatric allergy and immunology : official publication of the European Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology
New in vitro methods are essential for developing better follow-up criteria for venom immunotherapy (VIT).
Thirty-one children with a history of honeybee venom-induced systemic anaphylaxis were included in this prospective, single-blinded study. The basophil CD63 activation test (BAT) was assessed before starting VIT, at the end of the build-up phase (day 5), 6 months later, and after 2-4 yr of VIT.
Basophil CD63 activation test allowed identification of the culprit insect in 74% of honeybee venom-allergic children. In comparison, IgE reactivity was single positive in only 52% of children. Five days after starting VIT, BAT was highly comparable to before VIT. However, after 6 months and further after 2-4 yr of VIT, a significant and approximately fourfold decrease was demonstrated in CD63 response at sub-maximal 0.1 μg/ml allergen concentration, which mainly represents cellular sensitivity. No such differences were found at a higher 1 μg/ml of allergen concentration. Person-to-person analyses showed that after 2-4 yr of VIT, a marked CD63 decrease was evident in 85% of children. In addition, elevated basophil sensitivity measured before VIT was associated with the appearance of side effects observed during the build-up phase of VIT.
Basophil CD63 allergen-specific sensitivity seems to be a promising tool for monitoring protective immune response in honeybee VIT.
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.22130425
The safety and efficacy of sublingual and oral immunotherapy for milk allergy.
Keet Corinne A, Frischmeyer-Guerrerio Pamela A, Thyagarajan Ananth, Schroeder John T, Hamilton Robert G, Boden Stephen, Steele Pamela, Driggers Sarah, Burks A Wesley, Wood Robert A
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Oral immunotherapy (OIT) and sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) are potential therapies for food allergy, but the optimal method of administration, mechanism of action, and duration of response remain unknown.
We sought to explore the safety and efficacy of OIT and SLIT for the treatment of cow's milk (CM) allergy.
We randomized children with CM allergy to SLIT alone or SLIT followed by OIT. After screening double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenges and initial SLIT escalation, subjects either continued SLIT escalation to 7 mg daily or began OIT to either 1000 mg (the OITB group) or 2000 mg (the OITA group) of milk protein. They were challenged with 8 g of milk protein after 12 and 60 weeks of maintenance. If they passed the 60-week challenge, therapy was withdrawn, with challenges repeated 1 and 6 weeks later. Mechanistic correlates included end point titration skin prick testing and measurement of CM-specific IgE and IgG(4) levels, basophil histamine release, constitutive CD63 expression, CD203c expression, and intracellular spleen tyrosine kinase levels.
Thirty subjects with CM allergy aged 6 to 17 years were enrolled. After therapy, 1 of 10 subjects in the SLIT group, 6 of 10 subjects in the SLIT/OITB group, and 8 of 10 subjects in the OITA group passed the 8-g challenge (P = .002, SLIT vs OIT). After avoidance, 6 of 15 subjects (3 of 6 subjects in the OITB group and 3 of 8 subjects in the OITA group) regained reactivity, 2 after only 1 week. Although the overall reaction rate was similar, systemic reactions were more common during OIT than during SLIT. By the end of therapy, titrated CM skin prick test results and CD63 and CD203c expression decreased and CM-specific IgG(4) levels increased in all groups, whereas CM-specific IgE and spontaneous histamine release values decreased in only the OIT group.
OIT was more efficacious for desensitization to CM than SLIT alone but was accompanied by more systemic side effects. Clinical desensitization was lost in some cases within 1 week off therapy.
Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.22116803
Cell-secreted vesicles in equine ovarian follicular fluid contain miRNAs and proteins: a possible new form of cell communication within the ovarian follicle.
da Silveira Juliano C, Veeramachaneni D N Rao, Winger Quinton A, Carnevale Elaine M, Bouma Gerrit J
Biology of reproduction
Proper cell communication within the ovarian follicle is critical for the growth and maturation of a healthy oocyte that can be fertilized and develop into an embryo. Cell communication within the follicle involves many signaling molecules and is affected by maternal age. Recent studies indicate that cell communication can be mediated through secretion and uptake of small membrane-enclosed vesicles. The goals of this study were to 1) identify cell-secreted vesicles (microvesicles and exosomes) containing miRNAs and proteins within ovarian follicular fluid and 2) determine if miRNA level differs in exosomes isolated from follicular fluid in young compared to old mares. We demonstrate the presence of vesicles resembling microvesicles and exosomes in ovarian follicular fluid using transmission electron microscopy and CD63-positive and RNA containing vesicles using flow cytometry. Moreover, proteomics analysis reveals that follicular fluid-isolated exosomes contain both known exosomal proteins and proteins not previously reported in isolated exosomes. MicroRNAs were detected in microvesicle and exosomes preparations isolated from follicular fluid by real-time PCR analysis. Uptake of fluorescent-labeled microvesicles by granulosa cells was examined using in vitro and in vivo approaches. MicroRNA expression profiling reveals that miRNAs in microvesicle and exosome preparations isolated from follicular fluid also are present within surrounding granulosa and cumulus cells. These studies revealed that cell communication within the mammalian ovarian follicle may involve transfer of bioactive material by microvesicles and exosomes. Finally, miRNAs present in exosomes from ovarian follicular fluid varied with the age of the mare, and a number of different miRNAs were detected in young vs. old mare follicular fluid.22103850
CD164 as a Basophil Activation Marker.
Wolanczyk-Medrala Anna, Barg Wojciech, Medrala Wojciech
Current pharmaceutical design
Introduction of flow cytometric technique to the research on basophil activation has led to significant achievements in allergy diagnosis in vitro. Most of the studies employing the flow cytometry used CD63 as a marker of basophil activation and only some of them used CD203c. Recently discovered basophil activation markers, including CD164, opened new possibilities for solving majority of current diagnostic needs. Use of allergen-induced CD164 upregulation in diagnosis of pollen allergy has been validated, and this encourages to further studies on other diagnostic usefulness of this marker. There are some hopeful data indicating that it might be useful in diagnosis of allergy caused by variety of other allergens, including drug allergens. Although CD164 upregulation as a marker of basophil activation is a promising and powerful diagnostic tool, it still requires a lot of both basic research and comparative studies with older and well known markers, in order to select the best of them. A research on basophil CD164 upregulation caused by various stimuli offers a good possibility to increase our knowledge of basophil's involvement in allergic inflammation. Moreover, this might trigger a variety of pharmacological studies with known and new anti-inflammatory drugs in the future.22103505
The emerging role of tetraspanin microdomains on endothelial cells.
Bailey Rebecca L, Herbert John M, Khan Kabir, Heath Victoria L, Bicknell Roy, Tomlinson Michael G
Biochemical Society transactions
Tetraspanins function as organizers of the cell surface by recruiting specific partner proteins into tetraspanin-enriched microdomains, which regulate processes such as cell adhesion, signalling and intracellular trafficking. Endothelial cells appear to express at least 23 of the 33 human tetraspanins, and a number of recent studies have demonstrated their importance in endothelial cell biology. Tetraspanin CD151 is essential for pathological angiogenesis, which may in part be due to regulation of its main partner proteins, the laminin-binding integrins α3β1, α6β1 and α6β4. CD9 and CD151 are essential for leucocyte recruitment during an inflammatory response, through the formation of pre-assembled nano-platforms containing the adhesion molecules ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule 1) and VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule 1), which ultimately coalesce to form docking structures around captured leucocytes. Tetraspanin CD63 also facilitates leucocyte capture by promoting clustering of the adhesion molecule P-selectin. Finally, Tspan12 is required for blood vessel development in the eye, through regulation of Norrin-induced Frizzled-4 signalling, such that Tspan12 mutations can lead to human disease. Future studies on these and other endothelial tetraspanins are likely to provide further novel insights into angiogenesis and inflammation.22102340
STAT5 in human basophils: IL-3 is required for its FcεRI-mediated phosphorylation.
Verweij Marjoke M, Sabato Vito, Nullens Sara, Bridts Chris H, De Clerck Luc S, Stevens Wim J, Ebo Didier G
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Basophils are key effector cells in allergic inflammatory reactions. However, the mechanisms of FcεRI-induced degranulation are complex and remain to be disentangled. Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) molecules modulate various cell functions. STAT5 appears to be essential for IgE-mediated mast cell function, but its role in human basophils after cross-linking FcεRI is unknown. In this study, STAT5 phosphorylation was investigated by flow cytometry, and combined with analyses of the degranulation marker CD63 at single cell level. Kinetics of STAT5 phosphorylation were studied in basophils of birch pollen allergic patients and showed a fast phosphorylation induced by interleukin (IL)-3, but not with antigen alone. Stimulating basophils with a mixture of allergen and IL-3 resulted in a two to three fold higher phosphorylation of STAT5 than induced by IL-3 alone. In the presence of IL-3, antigen elicited a dose-dependent STAT5 response. In conclusion, this study demonstrates that STAT5 in human basophils is activated through both the IL-3 and the FcεRI signaling pathway.
Copyright © 2011 International Clinical Cytometry Society.22098244
Contents of mRNAs encoding endosome/lysosome components in normal human aorta and in stage II of atherogenesis: a hidden regulation.
Shchelkunova T A, Albert E A, Morozov I A, Rubtsov P M, Samokhodskaya L M, Sobenin I A, Orekhov A N, Smirnov A N
Biochemistry. Biokhimii͡a
Contents of mRNAs encoding endosome/lysosome components EEA1, Rab5a, Lamp1, Lamp2, p62 (SQSTM1), and CD63 were measured by quantitative PCR and compared in intact fragments of human aorta and in aorta fragments with atherosclerotic lesions of stage II (fatty streaks) of the same donors. During atherogenesis an increase was detected only in the level of p62 mRNA but not in other mRNAs. Nevertheless, correlation analysis revealed a profound rearrangement of inter-gene correlations: only 30% of correlations found in the fatty streaks coincided with the correlations in normal fragments. Thus, new constellations were formed in fatty streaks concurrently with disappearance of correlations between mRNAs under study and mRNAs encoding factors of lipid accumulation, reverse cholesterol transfer, and some lipid sensors/transcription regulators of lipid metabolism.22093044
Rhinitis symptoms caused by grass pollen are associated with elevated basophile allergen sensitivity and a larger grass-specific immunoglobulin E fraction.
Zidarn M, Košnik M, Silar M, Grahek A, Korošec P
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
The mechanisms responsible for the difference between clinically irrelevant IgE-sensitization and allergic rhinitis are not fully understood.
We evaluated the humoral and cellular mechanisms that may be associated with the presence of allergic rhinitis symptoms.
We selected 26 subjects with positive grass pollen skin tests and IgE antibodies to Timothy (g6) and the major grass allergens rPhl p 1, 5b. Fourteen of those patients reported a history of allergic rhinitis. During winter, we performed a grass pollen CD63 basophile activation test using four log allergen concentrations, followed by a grass nasal provocation test (NPT). We obtained symptom scores in the subsequent pollination season.
We showed that subjects with a positive NPT have significantly higher CD63 basophile grass pollen responsiveness than NPT-negative subjects, preferably at submaximal allergen concentrations, which represent cellular sensitivity. Moreover, basophile sensitivity positively correlated with the size of the grass-specific IgE fraction in relation to total IgE, and it was highly predictive of allergic rhinitis symptoms in the following pollination season.
Allergic rhinitis symptoms are significantly associated with allergen-specific basophile sensitivity. In vitro evaluation of basophile sensitivity should prove useful for distinguishing clinical phenotype of allergic sensitization.
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.22084943
Recovery, survival, and function of transfused platelets and detection of platelet engraftment after allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
Vetlesen Annette, Holme Pål André, Lyberg Torstein, Kjeldsen-Kragh Jens
Transfusion
Recovery and survival of transfused platelets (PLTs) are usually assessed by radioisotope labeling methods for evaluation of transfusion efficacy and new progress in the processing of PLT concentrates. Alternative, nonradioactive methods are warranted.
A multicolor flow cytometry method was developed for simultaneous studies of recovery, survival, and function of transfused PLTs. Eight consecutive patients undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplantation (TX) were transfused with apheresis PLTs of nonself human leukocyte antigen (HLA) Class I types, and HLA Class I discrepancy between donor and recipient was used to identify transfused PLTs. Hematologic status and HLA Class I surface expression were analyzed immediately before transfusion, 1 and 6 hours after transfusion, and daily during the subsequent week. PLT activation was assessed by surface expression of CD63, CD62P, or CD42a, before and after stimulation with thrombin receptor agonist peptide.
PLT recovery was 43, 41, and 31% for fresh (5-72 hr old) and 30, 27, and 17% for stored (73-148 hr old) PLTs, after 1, 6, and 15 to 28 hours, respectively. Survival of fresh versus stored PLTs were 160 and 105 hours, respectively. Spontaneous PLT activation and residual activation potential were almost equal for fresh and stored PLTs. PLT engraftment was detected between Day 7 and Day 9, which was significantly earlier than first sign of neutrophil engraftment (Days 11-19; p=0.01).
Flow cytometry is an attractive alternative to radiolabeling of PLTs for simultaneous studies of survival, recovery, and function of transfused PLTs and early detection of PLT engraftment after allogeneic stem cell TX.
© 2011 American Association of Blood Banks.22053095
TIMP1 contributes to ovarian anomalies in both an MMP-dependent and -independent manner in a rat model.
Stilley Julie A W, Sharpe-Timms Kathy L
Biology of reproduction
Ovulatory dysfunction occurs in women with endometriosis, yet the mechanisms are unknown. We have shown that endometriotic lesions synthesize and secrete tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) 1 into the peritoneal cavity in humans and a rat model of endometriosis, where excess TIMP1 localizes in the ovarian theca in endometriosis and modulating peritoneal TIMP1 alters ovarian dynamics. Here, we evaluated whether mechanisms whereby excessive peritoneal fluid TIMP1 negatively impacts ovarian function are matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-dependent and/or MMP-independent actions. Rats were treated with a mutated TIMP1 without MMP inhibitory function (Ala-TIMP1), wild-type TIMP1 (rTIMP1), or PBS. Rats treated with Ala-TIMP1 or rTIMP1 had fewer antral follicles, fewer new corpora lutea, and the presence of luteinized unruptured follicle syndrome compared with PBS rats. Ala-TIMP1 and rTIMP1 differentially caused downstream changes in gene expression and protein localization related to ovulation, as measured by whole-genome microarray with quantitative real-time PCR validation and immunohistochemistry. More vascular endothelial growth factor and FN were expressed and localized in ovaries of Ala-TIMP1-treated rats compared to rTIMP1- and PBS-treated rats inferring MMP-independent functions. Less caspase 3 localized in ovaries of rTIMP1 compared with the other two groups, and was thus dependent on MMP action. Furthermore, after coimmunoprecipitation, more CD63 was bound to TIMP1 in ovaries of rats treated with Ala-TIMP1 than in rTIMP1-treated rats, providing evidence for another MMP-independent mechanism of ovulatory dysfunction. We predict that MMP-dependent and MMP-independent events are involved in improper fortification of the follicular wall through multiple mechanisms, such as apoptosis inhibition, extracellular matrix components and angiogenesis. Collectively, excessive peritoneal TIMP1 causes changes in ovarian dynamics, both dependently and independently of MMP inhibition.22042057
Cultured human mast cells are heterogeneous for expression of the high-affinity IgE receptor FcεRI.
Hoffmann Hans Jürgen, Frandsen Pernille Munk, Christensen Lars Harder, Schiøtz Peter Oluf, Dahl Ronald
International archives of allergy and immunology
We determined the density of FcεRI on mast cells cultured from cord (CBMC) and peripheral blood (PBMC) and studied the kinetics of the response through FcεRI.
Mast cells were cultured from CD133+ progenitors from peripheral or cord blood. FcεRI was stabilized by culture with 2 μg/ml IgE. Cells were activated by addition of anti-FcεRI antibody (1 ng/ml-10 μg/ml). Maximal activation, sensitivity, and cooperativity were determined.
All cultures were homogeneous for tryptase and metachromasy. All cells expressing FcεRI could be activated by cross-linking FcεRI to upregulate CD63. PBMC bind 203,000 molecules of IgE/cell. Stabilization of FcεRI with IgE doubled the number of CD63+ cells (p = 0.0001) and increased the sensitivity (from 0.083 to 0.013 μg/ml anti-FcεRI) and the slope factor (from 10.8 to 68) of PBMC but not of CBMC. Anti-IgE reversed these effects (p = 0.0002) but did not reduce activation levels below that of cell lines not stabilized with IgE.
Baseline expression of FcεRI is independent of anti-IgE. The fraction of PBMC that binds high levels of IgE can be activated through FcεRI.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.22026976
A putative diacidic motif in the SARS-CoV ORF6 protein influences its subcellular localization and suppression of expression of co-transfected expression constructs.
Gunalan Vithiagaran, Mirazimi Ali, Tan Yee-Joo
BMC research notes
The ORF6 protein is one of the eight accessory proteins of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV). Numerous properties of ORF6 have been documented and this study focuses on two of these, namely, its ability to suppress the expression of co-transfected expression constructs and its subcellular localization to vesicular structures.
Using a transient transfection system, ORF6's ability to suppress the expression of co-transfected expression constructs was measured in a quantitative manner. While ORF6 does not have a global effect on protein synthesis, quantitative real-time PCR revealed that it down-regulated the mRNA level of the co-transfected myc-nsp8 gene. Furthermore, alanine substitution of a diacidic cluster motif (aa53-56) in the ORF6 gene caused a reduction in the suppression of expression of co-transfected myc-nsp8 gene. Our previous study revealed that ORF6 localized to vesicular structures in SARS-CoV infected Vero E6 cells. Here, ORF6 was observed to be localized to similar vesicular structures in Vero E6 cells which have been transiently transfected with a mammalian expression plasmid encoding for untagged ORF6. ORF6 showed partial colocalization with cellular proteins CD63 and Lamp1, suggesting that the vesicular structures may be a subpopulation of endosomal/lysosomal vesicles. The alanine substitution of the diacidic cluster motif also altered the subcellular localization of the ORF6 protein, indicating a potential relationship between the subcellular localization of the ORF6 protein and its ability to suppress the expression of co-transfected expression constructs.
By combining quantitative real-time PCR and transient transfection system, a simple and safe method is established to measure ORF6's ability to suppress the expression of co-transfected myc-nsp8. In addition, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that the subcellular localization of ORF6 when expressed on its own is similar to that observed in SARS-CoV infected cells. Through the use of these two assays, a putative diacidic motif in the ORF6 protein was found to influence its subcellular localization and ability to suppress the expression of co-transfected expression constructs.22017459
Quantitative nanostructural and single-molecule force spectroscopy biomolecular analysis of human-saliva-derived exosomes.
Sharma Shivani, Gillespie Boyd M, Palanisamy Viswanathan, Gimzewski James K
Langmuir : the ACS journal of surfaces and colloids
Exosomes are naturally occurring nanoparticles with unique structure, surface biochemistry, and mechanical characteristics. These distinct nanometer-sized bioparticles are secreted from the surfaces of oral epithelial cells into saliva and are of interest as oral-cancer biomarkers. We use high- resolution AFM to show single-vesicle quantitative differences between exosomes derived from normal and oral cancer patient's saliva. Compared to normal exosomes (circular, 67.4 ± 2.9 nm), our findings indicate that cancer exosome populations are significantly increased in saliva and display irregular morphologies, increased vesicle size (98.3 ± 4.6 nm), and higher intervesicular aggregation. At the single-vesicle level, cancer exosomes exhibit significantly (P < 0.05) increased CD63 surface densities. To our knowledge, it represents the first report detecting single-exosome surface protein variations. Additionally, high-resolution AFM imaging of cancer saliva samples revealed discrete multivesicular bodies with intraluminal exosomes enclosed. We discuss the use of quantitative, nanoscale ultrastructural and surface biomolecular analysis of saliva exosomes at single-vesicle- and single-protein-level sensitivities as a potentially new oral cancer diagnostic.
© 2011 American Chemical Society22016948
[Real-time detection of mast cell degranulation in anaphylactoid reaction].
Hu Jianjiang, Hou Yanming, Zhang Qian, Lei Hongtao, Wang Yi, Wang Danqiao
Zhongguo Zhong yao za zhi = Zhongguo zhongyao zazhi = China journal of Chinese materia medica
To establish a new, real time, dynamic and direct optical detection method for mast cell degranulation caused by anaphylactoid reaction.
A CD63-GFP plasmid was constructed and introduced steadily into rat basophilic leukemia (RBL-2H3) cells. The movements of CD63-GFP, which was located on both the granule membranes and the plasma membranes of RBL cells stimulated by Compound 48/80, were studied by confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) and total internal reflection fluorescence microscope (TIRFM) both inside and on the surface of living RBL-2H3 cells.
Before antigen stimulation, most granules with CD63-GFP hardly moved in RBL cells. However, after antigen stimulation, the granules moved dramatically. They reached the plasma membranes in a few minutes and fused with them instantaneously. The velocity of the granule movement toward the plasma membranes on antigen stimulation was calculated to be 0.05 micron x s(-1).
Analysis of the movement of each granule provided a new insight into the elementary process of degranulation. The method is rapid, sensitive and reliable, which could be used as a new detection method for anaphylactoid reaction in vitro.22009002
In vitro desensitization of human skin mast cells.
Zhao Wei, Gomez Gregorio, Macey Matthew, Kepley Christopher L, Schwartz Lawrence B
Journal of clinical immunology
Desensitization is a clinical procedure whereby incremental doses of a drug are administered over several hours to a sensitive patient until a therapeutic dose and clinical tolerance are achieved. Clinical tolerance may occur in part by attenuating the mast cell response. In the present study, primary human skin mast cells were used to establish and characterize an in vitro model of desensitization. Mast cells in culture were armed with allergen-specific (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacety and Der p2) and non-specific IgE antibodies, and then desensitized by incremental exposures to 4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacety-BSA. This desensitization procedure abrogated the subsequent degranulation response to the desensitizing allergen, to an unrelated allergen, and to IgG anti-FcεRI, but not to C5a, substance P, compound 48/80, and calcium ionophore. Desensitized cells regained their FcεRI-dependent degranulation capability by 24-48 h after free allergen had been removed. Therefore, sensitized human skin mast cells are reversibly desensitized in vitro by exposure to incremental doses of that allergen, which also cross-desensitizes them to an unrelated allergen.21998333
CD63 positions CD62P for rolling.
Ley Klaus
Blood
21986717
Hormone replacement therapy leads to increased plasma levels of platelet derived microparticles in postmenopausal women.
Rank Andreas, Nieuwland Rienk, Nikolajek Katharina, Rösner Sabine, Wallwiener Lisa-Maria, Hiller Erhard, Toth Bettina
Archives of gynecology and obstetrics
Whereas prevention of cardiovascular diseases by hormonal replacement therapy is still part of an ongoing debate, well-defined data are available relating hormonal replacement therapy to an elevated risk of venous thrombosis and embolism. Although it seems that venous thrombosis in patients treated with hormonal replacement therapy is linked to changes in plasmatic coagulation, less is known about the role of platelet-derived microparticles, as well as endothelial cell-derived microparticles.
In this prospective case-control study, levels of microparticles were investigated in postmenopausal women receiving hormone replacement therapy (n = 15) and compared to age-matched controls (n = 15).
Total count of microparticles and the subgroup of microparticles derived from endothelial cells did not differ in the investigated groups. In contrast, median levels of microparticles derived from platelet/megacaryocyte were higher in women taking hormonal replacement therapy (5,244 × 10(6)/l) than in controls (2,803 × 10(6)/l; p = 0.040). Furthermore, hormonal replacement therapy led to a higher plasma level of microparticles derived from activated platelets, exposing P-selectin (136 × 10(6)/l vs. 58 × 10(6)/l; p = 0.011), or exposing CD63 (171 × 10(6) vs. 91 × 10(6)/l; p = 0.011) compared to the control group.
Higher concentrations of microparticles derived from (activated) platelets/megacaryocytes were present in postmenopausal women taking hormonal replacement therapy. This finding indicates a procoagulant state in these women and might play a role in the development of venous side effects. In contrast, levels of endothelial cell-derived microparticles did not differ.21977985
Telocytes are the common cell of origin of both PEComas and GISTs: an evidence-supported hypothesis.
Ardeleanu Carmen, Bussolati Gianni
Journal of cellular and molecular medicine
We advance the hypothesis that the telocyte might be the cell of origin of both PEComas (perivascular epithelioid cell tumours) and GISTs (gastro-intestinal and extra-gastrointestinal stromal tumours). The hypothesis is supported by data from the literature reporting that both PEComas and GISTs, as well as telocytes, share the expression of several markers. These data were supplemented by original immunohistochemical tests on selected series. Specifically: (1) Melanoma markers (Melan A, MiTF) typical of PEComas are expressed by a substantial fraction of GISTs. A fraction of GISTs was also found positive for CD63, a tetraspanin protein originally described in melanomas and marking exosomes. (2) c-KIT (CD117), proper of the vast majority of GISTs, can be expressed by PEComas (as well as by telocytes). (3) Markers described in telocytes (CD34, S-100, smooth muscle actin and vascular endothelial growth factor) have been reported as positive in cases of PEComas and GISTs. Telocytes show distinctive ultrastructural features with thin, extended, telopodes and are likely involved in inter-cellular signalling via paracrine secretion as well as by shed vesicles and exosomes. These cells have been described in many locations (cavitary and non-cavitary organs) and might display potentialities of a wide spectrum of differentiation (and function). In conclusion we propose that telocytes could be the common cells of origin for both PEComas and GISTs.
© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.21962903
The tetraspanin CD63 regulates ESCRT-independent and -dependent endosomal sorting during melanogenesis.
van Niel Guillaume, Charrin Stéphanie, Simoes Sabrina, Romao Maryse, Rochin Leila, Saftig Paul, Marks Michael S, Rubinstein Eric, Raposo Graça
Developmental cell
Cargo sorting to intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) of multivesicular endosomes is required for lysosome-related organelle (LRO) biogenesis. PMEL-a component of melanocyte LROs (melanosomes)-is sorted to ILVs in an ESCRT-independent manner, where it is proteolytically processed and assembled into functional amyloid fibrils during melanosome maturation. Here we show that the tetraspanin CD63 directly participates in ESCRT-independent sorting of the PMEL luminal domain, but not of traditional ESCRT-dependent cargoes, to ILVs. Inactivating CD63 in cell culture or in mice impairs amyloidogenesis and downstream melanosome morphogenesis. Whereas CD63 is required for normal PMEL luminal domain sorting, the disposal of the remaining PMEL transmembrane fragment requires functional ESCRTs but not CD63. In the absence of CD63, the PMEL luminal domain follows this fragment and is targeted for ESCRT-dependent degradation. Our data thus reveal a tight interplay regulated by CD63 between two distinct endosomal ILV sorting processes for a single cargo during LRO biogenesis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.21946858
Basophil activation test for investigation of IgE-mediated mechanisms in drug hypersensitivity.
Steiner Markus, Harrer Andrea, Lang Roland, Schneider Michael, Ferreira Tima, Hawranek Thomas, Himly Martin
Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE
Hypersensitivity reactions against non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like propyphenazone (PP) and diclofenac (DF) can manifest as Type I-like allergic reactions (1). In clinical practice, diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity is mainly performed by patient history, as skin testing is not reliable and oral provocation testing bears life-threatening risks for the patient (2). Hence, evidence for an underlying IgE-mediated pathomechanism is hard to obtain. Here, we present an in vitro method based on the use of human basophils derived from drug-hypersensitive patients that mimics the allergic effector reaction in vivo. As basophils of drug-allergic patients carry IgE molecules specific for the culprit drug, they become activated upon IgE receptor crosslinking and release allergic effector molecules. The activation of basophils can be monitored by the determination of the upregulation of CD63 surface expression using flow cytometry (3). In the case of low molecular weight drugs, conjugates are designed to enable IgE receptor crosslinking on basophils. As depicted in Figure 1, two representatives of NSAIDs, PP and DF, are covalently bound to human serum albumin (HSA) via a carboxyl group reacting with the primary amino group of lysine residues. DF carries an intrinsic carboxyl group and, thus, can be used directly (4), whereas a carboxyl group-containing derivative of PP had to be organochemically synthesized prior to the study (1). The coupling degree of the low molecular weight compounds on the protein carrier molecule and their spatial distribution is important to guarantee crosslinking of two IgE receptor molecules. The here described protocol applies high performance-size exclusion chromatography (HPSEC) equipped with a sequential refractive index (RI) and ultra violet (UV) detection system for determination of the coupling degree. As the described methodology may be applied for other drugs, the basophil activation test (BAT) bears the potential to be used for the determination of IgE-mediated mechanisms in drug hypersensitivity. Here, we determine PP hypersensitivity as IgE-mediated and DF hypersensitivity as non-IgE-mediated by BAT.21945198
Analyzing histamine release by flow cytometry (HistaFlow): a novel instrument to study the degranulation patterns of basophils.
Ebo Didier G, Bridts Chris H, Mertens Christel H, Hagendorens Margo M, Stevens Wim J, De Clerck Luc S
Journal of immunological methods
Stimulated human basophils exhibit different degranulation patterns with release of mediators and appearance of activation markers such as CD63 and CD203c. Traditionally, released mediators are quantified in the supernatant of activated cells, whereas the expression of activation markers by individual cells is analyzed by flow cytometry. Alternatively, intracellular histamine and its release by basophils and mast cells have been repeatedly studied applying an enzyme-affinity-gold method based on the affinity of the histaminase diamine oxidase for its substrate histamine.
To develop a flow cytometric technique enabling to study histamine release by individual basophils in combination with the expression of activation markers. To elucidate the principles of basophil degranulation on a single cell level.
Intracellular histamine and its release is analyzed flow cytometrically by an enzyme-affinity method using diamine oxidase conjugated to laser-excitable fluorochromes. Phenotyping of cells implied flow cytometric quantification of CD63 and CD203c. Stimuli such as allergen, anti-IgE, N-formyl-met-leu-phe (fMLP), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), ionomycin and interleukin (IL-)3 are applied to obtain different degranulation profiles.
Stimulation with anti-IgE, allergen, fMLP and PMA±ionomycin induces a rapid release of histamine that can be analyzed flow cytometrically. Analyses on a single cell level reveal that histamine release is not restricted to cells showing significant up-regulation of CD63. Alternatively, up-regulation of CD203c does not per se indicate histamine release. In some patients, priming of cells with IL-3 not only facilitates basophil responsiveness but also implies an increased ability of DAO to label the cells.
This study provides the proof-of-concept that histamine and its release can be studied by multicolor flow cytometry on a single cell level (HistaFlow). Coupling the data to simultaneous phenotyping of activated basophils confirms that histamine release principally results from anaphylactic degranulation and in a lesser extent from piecemeal degranulation.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.21915303
Detachment of breast tumor cells induces rapid secretion of exosomes which subsequently mediate cellular adhesion and spreading.
Koumangoye Rainelli B, Sakwe Amos M, Goodwin J Shawn, Patel Tina, Ochieng Josiah
PloS one
Exosomes are nano-vesicles secreted by a wide range of mammalian cell types. These vesicles are abundant in serum and other extracellular fluids and contain a large repertoire of proteins, mRNA and microRNA. Exosomes have been implicated in cell to cell communication, the transfer of infectious agents, and neurodegenerative diseases as well as tumor progression. However, the precise mechanisms by which they are internalized and/or secreted remain poorly understood. In order to follow their release and uptake in breast tumor cells in real time, cell-derived exosomes were tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-CD63 while human serum exosomes were rhodamine isothiocynate-labeled. We show that detachment of adherent cells from various substrata induces a rapid and substantial secretion of exosomes, which then concentrate on the cell surfaces and mediate adhesion to various extracellular matrix proteins. We also demonstrate that disruption of lipid rafts with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MβCD) inhibits the internalization of exosomes and that annexins are essential for the exosomal uptake mechanisms. Taken together, these data suggest that cellular detachment is accompanied by significant release of exosomes while cellular adhesion and spreading are enhanced by rapid uptake and disposition of exosomes on the cell surface.21911130
The clinical implication of inhibiting platelet activation on chronic renal allograft dysfunction: a prospective cohort study.
Zhang Y, Zong H T, Yang C C, Zhang X D
Transplantation proceedings
Clinically chronic renal allograft dysfunction (CRAD) manifests as a progressive elevation of serum creatinine (Cr) with an associated deterioration in proteinuria and decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) following the first year after transplantation. Currently, how to delay or reverse CRAD and improve the long-term survival of transplanted kidneys is an intensively researched topic in the transplantation field.
The objective of this study was to examine the therapeutic efficacy and safety profile of inhibiting platelet activation on living related donor renal transplant recipients with CRAD.
We performed a prospective cohort study to examine the effects of inhibiting platelet activation on the expression of platelet activation markers, namely platelet surface glycoprotein IIIa (CD61), lysosomal enzyme glycoprotein (CD63), and fibrinogen receptor monoclonal antibody (PAC-1); we also studied platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) and transforming growth factor β(1) (TGF-β(1)) in the peripheral blood of renal graft recipients with CRAD. In addition, we correlated this metrics with the function of transplanted kidneys, peripheral blood platelet counts and trough concentrations of immunosuppressants.
Inhibiting platelet activation decreased the expression of platelet activation markers in peripheral blood: CD61 (P < .001), CD63 (P = .031), PAC-1 (P = .002), PDGF-BB (P = .013), and TGF-β(1) (P = .030). Cr and urea nitrogen remained stable compared with the control group, which showed progressive increases. The GFR of transplanted kidneys was improved (P = .033); however, there was no difference before versus after treatment in the platelet count (P = .991) or the trough concentration of immunosuppressants (cyclosporine, P = .071; tacrolimus, P = .984).
Inhibition of platelet activation, which was effective and safe, seemed to treat CRAD probably through improving the microcirculation of transplanted kidneys, down-regulating the expression of TGF-β, and thereby delaying fibrosis.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.21903858
BRAFV600E mutation, TIMP-1 upregulation, and NF-κB activation: closing the loop on the papillary thyroid cancer trilogy.
Bommarito Alessandra, Richiusa Pierina, Carissimi Elvira, Pizzolanti Giuseppe, Rodolico Vito, Zito Giovanni, Criscimanna Angela, Di Blasi Francesco, Pitrone Maria, Zerilli Monica, Amato Marco C, Spinelli Gaetano, Carina Valeria, Modica Giuseppe, Latteri M Adelfio, Galluzzo Aldo, Giordano Carla
Endocrine-related cancer
BRAF(V600E) is the most common mutation found in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP-1) and nuclear factor (NF)-κB have been shown to play an important role in thyroid cancer. In particular, TIMP-1 binds its receptor CD63 on cell surface membrane and activates Akt signaling pathway, which is eventually responsible for its anti-apoptotic activity. The aim of our study was to evaluate whether interplay among these three factors exists and exerts a functional role in PTCs. To this purpose, 56 PTC specimens were analyzed for BRAF(V600E) mutation, TIMP-1 expression, and NF-κB activation. We found that BRAF(V600E) mutation occurs selectively in PTC nodules and is associated with hyperactivation of NF-κB and upregulation of both TIMP-1 and its receptor CD63. To assess the functional relationship among these factors, we first silenced BRAF gene in BCPAP cells, harboring BRAF(V600E) mutation. We found that silencing causes a marked decrease in TIMP-1 expression and NF-κB binding activity, as well as decreased invasiveness. After treatment with specific inhibitors of MAPK pathway, we found that only sorafenib was able to increase IκB-α and reduce both TIMP-1 expression and Akt phosphorylation in BCPAP cells, indicating that BRAF(V600E) activates NF-κB and this pathway is MEK-independent. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that BRAF(V600E) causes upregulation of TIMP-1 via NF-κB. TIMP-1 binds then its surface receptor CD63, leading eventually to Akt activation, which in turn confers antiapoptotic behavior and promotion of cell invasion. The recognition of this functional trilogy provides insight on how BRAF(V600E) determines cancer initiation, progression, and invasiveness in PTC, also identifying new therapeutic targets for the treatment of highly aggressive forms.21861175
[In vitro diagnosis and monitoring of Hymenoptera venom hyposensitization].
Neis M M, Wurpts G, Wilbers L, Merk H F
Der Hautarzt; Zeitschrift für Dermatologie, Venerologie, und verwandte Gebiete
Specific immunotherapy (SIT) of hymenoptera venom allergy, in particular, has become an example for the effectiveness of the treatment of IgE-mediated allergic diseases. In vitro diagnostic procedures and the measurement of serum tryptase for risk assessment are well-established in the process of diagnose finding and therapy preparation. For monitoring and validation of the effectiveness of the SIT, however, in vitro diagnostic procedures remain controversial. Potentially useful approaches include detection of specific IgE, specific IgG4, basophile activation - represented by the CD 63 expression - and the lymphocyte proliferation and its IL10 release. Preliminary data suggest that the latter method appear appropriate, whereas the detection of basophile activation did not produce definite results.21859817
Monomeric C-reactive protein is prothrombotic and dissociates from circulating pentameric C-reactive protein on adhered activated platelets under flow.
Molins Blanca, Peña Esther, de la Torre Raquel, Badimon Lina
Cardiovascular research
We previously reported that C-reactive protein bioactivity on thrombogenesis was based on loss of its pentameric symmetry, resulting in formation of monomeric C-reactive protein. Our purpose was to provide mechanistic information on the direct effects of C-reactive protein isoforms on platelet activation and provide a C-reactive protein dissociation mechanism in circulating blood.
C-reactive protein-induced platelet activation was evaluated by flow cytometry. Platelet aggregation, clot properties, and coagulation were also measured. Washed platelets were incubated with C-reactive protein isoforms and vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) phosphorylation was analysed by western blot and immunofluorescence. C-reactive protein dissociation under flow was evaluated by confocal microscopy on the surface of adhered platelets after perfusing human blood containing pentameric C-reactive protein at different shear rates. Dissociated monomeric C-reactive protein thrombogenicity was measured in flow experiments. Platelet aggregation and flow cytometry analysis revealed that monomeric C-reactive protein significantly induced platelet aggregation, surface P-selectin and CD63 exposure, and glycoprotein IIb-IIIa activation, whereas pentameric C-reactive protein was unable to produce any effect. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitors, as well as CD36 blocking antibody partially inhibited monomeric C-reactive protein-induced platelet activation and aggregation. Additionally, monomeric C-reactive protein significantly induced VASP dephosphorylation at serine 239. We found that pentameric C-reactive protein dissociated into monomeric C-reactive protein on the surface of activated adhered platelets under flow conditions and that this generated monomeric C-reactive protein promoted further platelet recruitment.
These data indicate that whereas serum pentameric C-reactive protein may not affect platelet activation, monomeric C-reactive protein, which dissociates from pentameric C-reactive protein on the surface of activated platelets, could contribute to atherothrombotic complications by promoting thrombosis.21855127
Individual IL-3 priming is crucial for consistent in vitro activation of donor basophils in patients with chronic urticaria.
Gentinetta Thomas, Pecaric-Petkovic Tatjana, Wan Daniel, Falcone Franco H, Dahinden Clemens A, Pichler Werner J, Hausmann Oliver V
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
The in vivo autologous serum skin test (ASST) is the diagnostic gold standard to detect autoantibodies against FcεRI or IgE itself, as well as other autoreactive serum components, in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria (CU). Coincubation of patient sera with donor basophils and measuring their degranulation in vitro could be a safe alternative but has shown inconsistent results.
Optimization of the basophil activation test to detect autoreactive serum components in patients with CU.
The ability of patient sera to induce CD63 and CD203c in donor basophils (n = 15) was measured by means of flow cytometry. Sera of 20 patients with CU (10 with positive ASST results), 15 patients with cold urticaria, and 27 healthy control subjects were included to optimize test conditions with donor basophils and a basophil cell line (RBL703/21) followed by testing of 110 consecutive patients from clinical routine.
We demonstrate that individual IL-3 priming normalized the initially inconsistent basophil reactivity and led to reproducible and comparable test results irrespective of the basophil donors used. CD203c as an activation marker and the use of a basophil cell line were less suitable for this purpose.
The basophil activation test with individualized IL-3 priming for each basophil donor is a reproducible and reliable alternative to the ASST. There are several advantages over the ASST: no risk of accidental infection, no influence of antihistamines on the test result, quantifiable results, and a potential in providing treatment monitoring. The exact nature of the degranulating factor or factors in patient sera remains an open question.
Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.21848516
A novel allergen Tab y 1 with inhibitory activity of platelet aggregation from salivary glands of horseflies.
An S, Ma D, Wei J F, Yang X, Yang H W, Yang H, Xu X, He S, Lai R
Allergy
Horsefly sting causes allergic reactions in human body. However, our knowledge on horsefly allergens remains poor.
To identify the novel horsefly allergens and characterize their properties.
A native allergen protein Tab y 1 (apyrase) was purified from the salivary glands of the horsefly Tabanus yao Macquart by gel filtration and ion exchange chromatography. Its sequence was determined by Edman degradation and cDNA cloning. Its allergenicity was assessed by immunoblotting for specific IgE, basophil activation test, skin prick test (SPT), and competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Tab y 1 showed a single diffusion band of 70 kDa on SDS-PAGE. Seventy percent (7/10) of patients with horsefly allergy tested positive to Tab y 1 in SPT; sera from 81% (30/37) of patients reacted to Tab y 1 on western blots. Purified Tab y 1 reduced approximately 42% sera IgE reactivity to horsefly salivary gland extract on a competitive ELISA. Tab y 1 upregulated the expression of CD63 and CCR3 on passively sensitized basophils by up to approximately 4.9-fold. Tab y 1 also showed enzymatic activity to hydrolyze ATP and ADP, and potent antiplatelet aggregation and antithrombotic activities.
The current work identified a novel major allergen of horsefly, Tab y 1, with antiplatelet aggregation and antithrombotic activities, which implicates Tab y 1 in helping horseflies suck host blood, meanwhile causing allergy in their human hosts.
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.21843104
Laboratory markers of mast cell and basophil activation in monitoring rush immunotherapy in bee venom-allergic children.
Cichocka-Jarosz Ewa, Dorynska Agnieszka, Pietrzyk Jacek J, Spiewak Radoslaw
Immunotherapy
To evaluate markers of mast cell and basophil activation in children undergoing the initial phase of honeybee venom immunotherapy (VIT).
Five children (four boys and one girl) aged 9.5-18 years with severe systemic bee sting reactions and confirmed IgE-mediated allergy were enrolled. Plasma and urine concentrations of 9α,11β-PGF2 and serum tryptase levels were measured at four time points and peripheral blood basophil count and CD63 expression were measured at three time points in the course of VIT, including 5-day rush initial immunotherapy (cumulative dose of 223 µg of bee venom allergen) and two subsequent maintenance doses of 100 µg.
In the first 40 days of VIT, there was a decrease in mean plasma levels of 9α,11β-PGF2 (from 41.5 to 27.9 pg/ml; p < 0.05), accompanied by an increase in baseline basophil activation (from 2 to 15%; p < 0.05). The median serum tryptase levels increased from 3.45 to 4.40 ng/ml during rush phase and subsequently returned to initial values (statistically not significant). In four patients, the basophil activation test in response to bee venom allergens remained positive throughout the study. The fifth patient was basophil activation test-negative at all three measurements, and a post hoc analysis revealed clinical peculiarities that are discussed in the paper.
Our preliminary results indicate that plasma levels of 9α,11β-PGF2 decrease while numbers of activated basophils increase during the initial phase of bee venom rush immunotherapy in children.21835908
Exosomes from human CD34(+) stem cells mediate their proangiogenic paracrine activity.
Sahoo Susmita, Klychko Ekaterina, Thorne Tina, Misener Sol, Schultz Kathryn M, Millay Meredith, Ito Aiko, Liu Ting, Kamide Christine, Agrawal Hemant, Perlman Harris, Qin Gangjian, Kishore Raj, Losordo Douglas W
Circulation research
Transplantation of human CD34(+) stem cells to ischemic tissues has been associated with reduced angina, improved exercise time, and reduced amputation rates in phase 2 clinical trials and has been shown to induce neovascularization in preclinical models. Previous studies have suggested that paracrine factors secreted by these proangiogenic cells are responsible, at least in part, for the angiogenic effects induced by CD34(+) cell transplantation.
Our objective was to investigate the mechanism of CD34(+) stem cell-induced proangiogenic paracrine effects and to examine if exosomes, a component of paracrine secretion, are involved.
Exosomes collected from the conditioned media of mobilized human CD34(+) cells had the characteristic size (40 to 90 nm; determined by dynamic light scattering), cup-shaped morphology (electron microscopy), expressed exosome-marker proteins CD63, phosphatidylserine (flow cytometry) and TSG101 (immunoblotting), besides expressing CD34(+) cell lineage marker protein, CD34. In vitro, CD34(+) exosomes replicated the angiogenic activity of CD34(+) cells by increasing endothelial cell viability, proliferation, and tube formation on Matrigel. In vivo, the CD34(+) exosomes stimulated angiogenesis in Matrigel plug and corneal assays. Interestingly, exosomes from CD34(+) cells but not from CD34(+) cell-depleted mononuclear cells had angiogenic activity.
Our data demonstrate that human CD34(+) cells secrete exosomes that have independent angiogenic activity both in vitro and in vivo. CD34(+) exosomes may represent a significant component of the paracrine effect of progenitor cell transplantation for therapeutic angiogenesis.21833457
A dual role for diacylglycerol kinase generated phosphatidic acid in autoantibody-induced neutrophil exocytosis.
Holden Neil J, Savage Caroline O S, Young Stephen P, Wakelam Michael J, Harper Lorraine, Williams Julie M
Molecular medicine (Cambridge, Mass.)
Dysregulated release of neutrophil azurophilic granules causes increased tissue damage and amplified inflammation during autoimmune disease. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) are implicated in the pathogenesis of small vessel vasculitis and promote adhesion and exocytosis in neutrophils. ANCAs activate specific signal transduction pathways in neutrophils that have the potential to be modulated therapeutically to prevent neutrophil activation by ANCAs. We have investigated a role for diacylglycerol kinase (DGK) and its downstream product phosphatidic acid (PA) in ANCA-induced neutrophil exocytosis. Neutrophils incubated with the DGK inhibitor R59022, before treatment with ANCAs, exhibited a reduced capacity to release their azurophilic granules, demonstrated by a component release assay and flow cytometry. PA restored azurophilic granule release in DGK-inhibited neutrophils. Confocal microscopy revealed that R59022 did not inhibit translocation of granules, indicating a role for DGK during the process of granule fusion at the plasma membrane. In investigating possible mechanisms by which PA promotes neutrophil exocytosis, we demonstrated that exocytosis can only be restored in R59022-treated cells through simultaneous modulation of membrane fusion and increasing cytosolic calcium. PA and its associated pathways may represent viable drug targets to reduce tissue injury associated with ANCA-associated vasculitic diseases and other neutrophilic inflammatory disorders.21829057
[Changes in parameters of coagulation system after treatment of chronic heart failure with β-adrenoblockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, calcium antagonists, diuretics, anticoagulants, antiagregants, cardiac glycosides, and physical exercise].
Mongirdienė Aušra
Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
Scientific research has proved that coagulation system is more active in patients with chronic heart failure than in healthy people. Therefore, the aim of this article was to review the data in literature about changes in coagulation system after treatment of chronic heart failure with β-adrenoblockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, calcium antagonists, cardiac glycosides, diuretics, anticoagulants, and antiagregants. It is known that β-adrenoblockers used separately decrease platelet aggregation and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors reduce P-selectin expression as well. Low-molecular-weight heparin decreases the concentrations of prothrombin fragments, D-dimers; orally administered anticoagulants reduce the concentrations of interleukin 6, von Willebrand factor, intercellular adhesion molecules, fibrinogen 1+2 and increases the concentration of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1. Both anticoagulants reduce the levels of VII:C factors and thrombin-antithrombin III complex. The use of aspirin together with clopidogrel reduces the concentration of intercellular adhesion and platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecules and expression of P-selectins; however, these concentrations do not vary while using aspirin alone. The treatment with ACE inhibitors together with calcium antagonists and β-adrenoblockers decreases activated partial thromboplastin time, concentrations of D-dimers, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, vascular cell adhesion molecules, CD63 and expression of L- and P-selectins. While analyzing the effect of abovementioned agents, it is necessary to mention that data reported by different authors are not consistent. Therefore, the effect of particular drugs on the particular parameters of coagulation system has not been completely elucidated.21803846
CD63 is an essential cofactor to leukocyte recruitment by endothelial P-selectin.
Doyle Emily L, Ridger Victoria, Ferraro Francesco, Turmaine Mark, Saftig Paul, Cutler Daniel F
Blood
The activation of endothelial cells is critical to initiating an inflammatory response. Activation induces the fusion of Weibel-Palade Bodies (WPB) with the plasma membrane, thus transferring P-selectin and VWF to the cell surface, where they act in the recruitment of leukocytes and platelets, respectively. CD63 has long been an established component of WPB, but the functional significance of its presence within an organelle that acts in inflammation and hemostasis was unknown. We find that ablating CD63 expression leads to a loss of P-selectin-dependent function: CD63-deficient HUVECs fail to recruit leukocytes, CD63-deficient mice exhibit a significant reduction in both leukocyte rolling and recruitment and we show a failure of leukocyte extravasation in a peritonitis model. Loss of CD63 has a similar phenotype to loss of P-selectin itself, thus CD63 is an essential cofactor to P-selectin.21796726
A gain-of-glycosylation mutation associated with myoclonus-dystonia syndrome affects trafficking and processing of mouse ε-sarcoglycan in the late secretory pathway.
Waite Adrian, De Rosa Maria Cristina, Brancaccio Andrea, Blake Derek J
Human mutation
Missense mutations in the SGCE gene encoding ε-sarcoglycan account for approximately 15% of SGCE-positive cases of myoclonus-dystonia syndrome (MDS) in humans. In this study, we show that while the majority of MDS-associated missense mutants modeled with a murine ε-sarcoglycan cDNA are substrates for endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation, one mutant, M68T (analogous to human c.275T>C, p.M92T), located in the Ig-like domain of ε-sarcoglycan, results in a gain-of-glycosylation mutation producing a protein that is targeted to the plasma membrane, albeit at reduced levels compared to wild-type ε-sarcoglycan. Removal of the ectopic N-linked glycan failed to restore efficient plasma membrane targeting of M68T demonstrating that the substitution rather than the glycan was responsible for the trafficking defect of this mutant. M68T also colocalized with CD63-positive vesicles in the endosomal-lysosomal system and was found to be more susceptible to lysosomal proteolysis than wild-type ε-sarcoglycan. Finally, we demonstrate impaired ectodomain shedding of M68T, a process that occurs physiologically for ε-sarcoglycan resulting in the lysosomal trafficking of the intracellular C-terminal domain of the protein. Our findings show that functional analysis of rare missense mutations can provide a mechanistic insight into the pathogenesis of MDS and the physiological role of ε-sarcoglycan.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.21794906
Clinical safety of Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 (FAHF-2) and inhibitory effect on basophils from patients with food allergy: Extended phase I study.
Patil Sangita P, Wang Julie, Song Ying, Noone Sally, Yang Nan, Wallenstein Sylvan, Sampson Hugh A, Li Xiu-Min
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Food allergy is a common and increasing health concern in westernized countries. No effective treatment is available, and accidental ingestion can be life-threatening. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 (FAHF-2) blocks peanut-induced anaphylaxis in a murine model of peanut-induced anaphylaxis. It was found to be safe and well tolerated in an acute phase I study of patients with food allergy.
We sought to assess the safety of FAHF-2 in an extended phase I clinical trial and determine the potential effects on peripheral blood basophils from patients with food allergy.
Patients in an open-label study received 3.3 g (6 tablets) of FAHF-2 three times a day for 6 months. Vital signs, physical examination results, laboratory data, pulmonary function test results, and electrocardiographic data were acquired at baseline and at 2-month intervals. During the course of the study, basophil activation and basophil and eosinophil numbers were evaluated by using CCR3/CD63 staining and flow cytometry.
Of 18 patients enrolled, 14 completed the study. No significant drug-associated differences in laboratory parameters, pulmonary function study results, or electrocardiographic findings before and after treatment were found. There was a significant reduction (P < .010) in basophil CD63 expression in response to ex vivo stimulation at month 6. There was also a trend toward a reduction in eosinophil and basophil numbers after treatment.
FAHF-2 was safe and well tolerated and had an inhibitory effects on basophil numbers in an extended phase I clinical study. A controlled phase II study is warranted.
Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.21775684
SIRPα/CD172a regulates eosinophil homeostasis.
Verjan Garcia Noel, Umemoto Eiji, Saito Yasuyuki, Yamasaki Mikako, Hata Erina, Matozaki Takashi, Murakami Masaaki, Jung Yun-Jae, Woo So-Youn, Seoh Ju-Young, Jang Myoung Ho, Aozasa Katsuyuki, Miyasaka Masayuki
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Eosinophils are abundant in the lamina propria of the small intestine, but they rarely show degranulation in situ under steady-state conditions. In this study, using two novel mAbs, we found that intestinal eosinophils constitutively expressed a high level of an inhibitory receptor signal regulatory protein α (SIRPα)/CD172a and a low, but significant, level of a tetraspanin CD63, whose upregulation is closely associated with degranulation. Cross-linking SIRPα/CD172a on the surface of wild-type eosinophils significantly inhibited the release of eosinophil peroxidase induced by the calcium ionophore A23187, whereas this cross-linking effect was not observed in eosinophils isolated from mice expressing a mutated SIRPα/CD172a that lacks most of its cytoplasmic domain (SIRPα Cyto(-/-)). The SIRPα Cyto(-/-) eosinophils showed reduced viability, increased CD63 expression, and increased eosinophil peroxidase release with or without A23187 stimulation in vitro. In addition, SIRPα Cyto(-/-) mice showed increased frequencies of Annexin V-binding eosinophils and free MBP(+)CD63(+) extracellular granules, as well as increased tissue remodeling in the small intestine under steady-state conditions. Mice deficient in CD47, which is a ligand for SIRPα/CD172a, recapitulated these phenomena. Moreover, during Th2-biased inflammation, increased eosinophil cell death and degranulation were obvious in a number of tissues, including the small intestine, in the SIRPα Cyto(-/-) mice compared with wild-type mice. Collectively, our results indicated that SIRPα/CD172a regulates eosinophil homeostasis, probably by interacting with CD47, with substantial effects on eosinophil survival. Thus, SIRPα/CD172a is a potential therapeutic target for eosinophil-associated diseases.21755595
A novel Dutch mutation in UNC13D reveals an essential role of the C2B domain in munc13-4 function.
Elstak Edo D, te Loo Maroeska, Tesselaar Kiki, van Kerkhof Peter, Loeffen Jan, Grivas Dimitris, Hennekam Eric, Boelens Jaap Jan, Hoogerbrugge Peter M, van der Sluijs Peter, van Gijn Marielle E, van de Corput Lisette
Pediatric blood & cancer
UNC13D, encoding the protein munc13-4, is essential in intracellular trafficking and exocytosis of lytic granules. Mutations in this gene are associated with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 3 (FHL3), a genetically heterogeneous, rare autosomal recessive immune disorder. How mutations affect function of munc13-4 is poorly understood. Since 2006 we genetically identified seven FHL patients with mutations in UNC13D.
Here, we report for the first time a c.2695C>T (p.Arg899X) mutation in exon 28 of UNC13D in three young unrelated Dutch patients. The mutation causes a premature stop codon and encodes munc13-4(1-899), which lacks the C-terminal C2 domain. Genealogical research and haplotyping of the patient families demonstrated that a single ancestral founder introduced the mutation in the Netherlands. We then characterized the mutant protein phenotypically in cell biological and immunological assays.
Munc13-4(1-899) was correctly targeted to CD63-positive secretory lysosomes, although its stability was reduced and dynamic turnover on the granule membrane became uncoupled from receptor signaling. In accord, and in contrast to wild-type munc13-4, ectopically expressed mutant failed to rescue degranulation in cells with silenced endogenous munc13-4.
The functional and clinical data showed that this novel Dutch founder mutation leads to severe early onset of FHL3 due to misfolding and degradation of munc13-4(1-899).
Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.21741384
A filtration-based protocol to isolate human plasma membrane-derived vesicles and exosomes from blood plasma.
Grant Ryan, Ansa-Addo Ephraim, Stratton Dan, Antwi-Baffour Samuel, Jorfi Samireh, Kholia Sharad, Krige Lizelle, Lange Sigrun, Inal Jameel
Journal of immunological methods
The methods of Plasma Membrane-derived Vesicle (PMV) isolation and quantification vary considerably in the literature and a new standard needs to be defined. This study describes a novel filtration method to isolate PMVs in plasma, which avoids high speed centrifugation, and to quantify them using a Becton Dickinson (BD) FACS Calibur™ flow cytometer, as annexin V-positive vesicles, larger than 0.2 μm in diameter. Essentially microvesicles (which comprise a mixture of PMVs and exosomes) from citrate plasma were sonicated to break up clumped exosomes, and filtered using Millipore 0.1 μm pore size Hydrophilic Durapore membranes in Swinnex 13 mm filter holders. Phosphatidylserine-positive PMVs detected with annexin V-PE were quantified using combined labelling and gating strategies in conjunction with Polysciences Polybead Microspheres (0.2 μm) and BDTrucount tubes. The PMV absolute count was calculated on the analysis template using the Trucount tube lot number information and expressed in PMV count/ml. Having estimated a normal reference range (0.51×10(5)-2.82×10(5) PMVs/ml) from a small sample of human donors, using the developed method, the effect of certain variables was investigated. Variations such as freezing of samples and gender status did not significantly alter the PMV absolute count, and with age plasma PMV levels were only marginally reduced. Smokers appeared to have reduced PMV levels. Nicotine, as for calpeptin was shown to dose-dependently (from 10 up to 50 μM) reduce levels of early apoptosis in THP-1 monocytes and to decrease the level of PMV release. Fasting individuals had 2-3 fold higher PMV absolute counts compared to non-fasting subjects.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.21740551
Statin pre-treatment is associated with lower platelet activity and favorable outcome in patients with acute non-cardio-embolic ischemic stroke.
Tsai Nai-Wen, Lin Tsu-Kung, Chang Wen-Neng, Jan Chung-Ren, Huang Chi-Ren, Chen Shang-Der, Cheng Kuei-Yueh, Chiang Yi-Fang, Wang Hung-Chen, Yang Tzu-Ming, Lin Yu-Jun, Lin Wei-Che, Chang Hsueh-Wen, Lee Lian-Hui, Lu Cheng-Hsien
Critical care (London, England)
Statins reportedly have anti-inflammatory and anti-thrombotic effects aside from cholesterol-lowering. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of pre-existing statin use on platelet activation markers and clinical outcome in acute ischemic stroke patients.
This prospective study evaluated 172 patients with acute ischemic stroke divided in two groups: patients with pre-existing statin (n = 43) and without pre-existing statin (66 cases with statins initiated post-stroke and 63 without statin treatment). Platelet activation markers (CD62P and CD63) were measured by flow cytometry at different time points after stroke and analyzed with clinical outcome.
The CD62P and CD63 expressions on platelets were significantly lower in the patients with pre-existing statin use compared to the patients without pre-existing statin use on Day 1 post-stroke (p < 0.05). The CD62P expression was significantly lower in the patients with pre-existing statin use on 90 days after the acute stroke (p < 0.05). Patients with pre-existing statin use had lower incidences of early neurologic deterioration (END) than those without treatment (p < 0.05). Among several baseline clinical variables, admission NIHSS score, history of coronary artery disease, and pre-existing statin use were independent predictions of good clinical outcome at three months.
Pre-existing statin use is associated with decreased platelet activity as well as improved clinical outcome and reduced END in patients with acute ischemic stroke.21701167
Early impact of prescription Omega-3 fatty acids on platelet biomarkers in patients with coronary artery disease and hypertriglyceridemia.
Serebruany Victor L, Miller Michael, Pokov Alex N, Lynch Donald, Jensen Jesper K, Hallén Jonas, Atar Dan
Cardiology
Background: Prescription omega-3-acid ethyl esters (PO-3A) have been tested for outcome benefits in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), arrhythmias and heart failure. Some evidence suggests that PO-3A may exert their benefit via inhibiting platelets. We tested the hypothesis that PO-3A may inhibit platelet activity in patients with documented stable CAD, beyond the antiplatelet properties of aspirin and statins. Methods: Thirty patients with documented CAD and triglycerides over 250 mg/dl treated with aspirin (70-160 mg/daily) and statins (simvastatin equivalence dose: 5-40 mg/daily) were randomized 1:1:1 to Omacor™ 1 g/day (DHA/EPA ratio 1.25:1.0), Omacor 2 g/day, or a placebo for 2 weeks. Platelet tests including aggregometry and flow cytometry and cartridge analyzer readings were performed at baseline and at 1 and 2 weeks following PO-3A therapy. Results: ADP-induced platelet aggregation (p = 0.037), GP IIb/IIIa antigen (p = 0.031) and activity (p = 0.024), and P-selectin (p = 0.041) were significantly reduced after PO-3A, while platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule (p = 0.09), vitronectin receptor (p = 0.16), formation of platelet-monocyte microparticles (p = 0.19) and the VerifyNow IIb/IIIa test (p = 0.27) only exhibited nonsignificant trends suggestive of reduced platelet activity. Finally, collagen- and arachidonic acid-induced aggregation, closure time with the PFA-100 device and expression of thrombospondin (CD36), GP Ib (CD42b), LAMP-3 (CD63), LAMP-1 (CD107a), CD40-ligand (CD154), GP37 (CD165), and PAR-1 receptor intact (SPAN 12) and cleaved (WEDE-15) epitopes were not affected by 2 weeks of PO-3A. Conclusion: Independently of the dose and already at 1 week, short-term therapy with PO-3A provided a modest reduction of platelet activity biomarkers, despite concomitant aspirin and statin therapy, when compared to a placebo. The effect of PO-3A is unique, differs from other known antiplatelet agents and suggests potential pleiotropism. These preliminary randomized data call for confirmation in prospective studies.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.21674799
ErbB2-associated changes in the lysosomal proteome.
Nylandsted Jesper, Becker Andrea C, Bunkenborg Jakob, Andersen Jens S, Dengjel Jörn, Jäättelä Marja
Proteomics
Late endosomes and lysosomes (hereafter referred to as lysosomes) play an essential role in the turnover of cellular macromolecules and organelles. Their biochemical characterization has so far depended on purification methods based on either density gradient centrifugations or magnetic purification of iron-loaded organelles. Owing to dramatic changes in lysosomal density and stability associated with lysosomal diseases and cancer, these methods are not optimal for the comparison of normal and pathological lysosomes. Here, we introduce an efficient method for the purification of intact lysosomes by magnetic immunoprecipitation with antibodies against the vacuolar-type H(+) -ATPase. Quantitative MS-based proteomics analysis of the obtained lysosomal membranes identified 60 proteins, most of which have previously been associated with the lysosomal compartment. Interestingly, the lysosomal membrane proteome was significantly altered by the ectopic expression of an active form of the ErbB2 oncogene, which renders the cells highly metastatic. The furthermost ErbB2-associated changes included increased levels of CD63, S100A11 and ferritin heavy chain. Overall, our data introduce the antibody-based purification of lysosomes as a suitable method for the characterization of lysosomes from a variety of pathological conditions with altered lysosomal density and stability.
Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.21660937
The role of tetraspanin CD63 in antigen presentation via MHC class II.
Petersen Sven H, Odintsova Elena, Haigh Tracey A, Rickinson Alan B, Taylor Graham S, Berditchevski Fedor
European journal of immunology
Interactions between MHC class II (MHC II)-positive APCs and CD4(+) T cells are central to adaptive immune responses. Using an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) as MHC II-positive APCs and CD4(+) T-cell clones specific for two endogenously expressed EBV antigens, we found that shRNA knockdown of the tetraspanin protein CD63 in LCL cells consistently led to increased CD4(+) T-cell recognition. This effect was not due to enhanced antigen processing nor to changes in MHC II expression since CD63 knockdown did not influence the amount or dimerization of MHC II in LCL cells. We therefore investigated the possible involvement of exosomes, small MHC II- and tetraspanin-abundant vesicles which are secreted by LCL cells and which we found could themselves activate the CD4(+) T-cell clones in an MHC II-dependent manner. While equal loadings of exosomes purified from the control and CD63(low) LCLs stimulated T cells to a comparable degree, we found that exosome production significantly increased following CD63-knockdown, suggesting that this may underlie the greater T-cell stimulatory capacity of the CD63(low) LCLs. Taken together, our data reveal a new insight into the mechanisms by which tetraspanins are involved in the regulation of MHC II-dependent T-cell stimulation.
Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.21649851
Hyperthermia inhibits platelet hemostatic functions and selectively regulates the release of alpha-granule proteins.
Etulain J, Lapponi M J, Patrucchi S J, Romaniuk M A, Benzadón R, Klement G L, Negrotto S, Schattner M
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
Hyperthermia is one of the main disturbances of homeostasis occurring during sepsis or hypermetabolic states such as cancer. Platelets are important mediators of the inflammation that accompanies these processes, but very little is known about the changes in platelet function that occur at different temperatures.
To explore the effect of higher temperatures on platelet physiology.
Platelet responses including adhesion, spreading (fluorescence microscopy), α(IIb)β(3) activation (flow cytometry), aggregation (turbidimetry), ATP release (luminescence), thromboxane A(2) generation, alpha-granule protein secretion (ELISA) and protein phosphorylation from different signaling pathways (immunoblotting) were studied.
Preincubation of platelets at temperatures higher than 37 °C (38.5-42 °C) inhibited thrombin-induced hemostasis, including platelet adhesion, aggregation, ATP release and thromboxane A(2) generation. The expression of P-selectin and CD63, as well as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) release, was completely inhibited by hyperthermia, whereas von Willebrand factor (VWF) and endostatin levels remained substantially increased at high temperatures. This suggested that release of proteins from platelet granules is modulated not only by classical platelet agonists but also by microenvironmental factors. The observed gradation of response involved not only antiangiogenesis regulators, but also other cargo proteins. Some signaling pathways were more stable than others. While ERK1/2 and AKT phosphorylation were resistant to changes in temperature, Src, Syk, p38 phosphorylation and IkappaB degradation were decreased in a temperature-dependent fashion.
Higher temperatures, such as those observed with fever or tissue invasion, inhibit the hemostatic functions of platelets and selectively regulate the release of alpha-granule proteins.
© 2011 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.21625559
Regulation of zebrafish hatching by tetraspanin cd63.
Trikić Michael Z, Monk Pete, Roehl Henry, Partridge Lynda J
PloS one
Tetraspanins cause the clustering of membrane proteins into a level of organisation essential for cellular function. Given the importance and complicated nature of this mechanism, we attempted a novel approach to identify the function of a single component in a biologically relevant context. A morpholino knockdown strategy was used to investigate the role of cd63, a membrane protein associated with intracellular transport and a melanoma marker, in embryonic zebrafish. By using three separate morpholinos targeting cd63, we were able to identify a specific phenotype. Strikingly, morphant fish failed to hatch due to the lack of secreted proteolytic enzymes required for chorion-softening. The morphology of the hatching gland at both the cellular and intracellular levels was disorganised, suggesting a role for cd63 in the functioning of this organ. This work identifies a specific role for cd63 in the zebrafish embryo and provides evidence for the suitability of zebrafish as a model system for the investigation of tetraspanin enriched microdomains.21608219
[Effect of tongxinluo capsule on platelet activities and vascular endothelial functions as well as prognosis in patients with acute coronary syndrome undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention].
Chen Zhang-qiang, Hong Lang, Wang Hong
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban
To observe the effect of Tongxinluo Capsule on platelet activities and vascular endothelial functions as well as prognosis in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) at different stages.
160 patients with acute coronary syndrome were randomly assigned to Tongxinluo (TXL) group (80 patients) and the conventional treatment group (80 patients). And 50 healthy subjects were set up as the health control group. Patients' plasma platelet activating factors (CD62p, CD63), and glucose protein (GP) IIb/IIIa, and endothelium-1 (ET-1), von Willebrand factor (vWF), nitric oxide (NO) levels, and endothelium dependent flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) were detected respectively. Patients in the TXL group orally took TXLC for six months. The aforesaid indices were re-detected in all patients after two months and six months. Comparison between before and after treatment in the same group and inter-group comparison were performed in the two groups.
Compared with the health control group, CD62p, CD63, GPIIb/IIIa, vWF, and ET-1 levels increased significantly in ACS patients after PCI (all P<0.01), NO and FMD significantly decreased (P<0.01). CD62p, CD63, GPIIb/IIIa and, vWF also increased, and FMD decreased after PCI (all P<0.05), but insignificant difference was found in ET-1 and NO (P>0.05). In the TXL group and the conventional treatment group, the levels of CD62p, CD63, GPIIb/IIIa, vWF and ET-1 decreased significantly (P<0.05, P<0.01), NO and FMD increased (P<0.05, P<0. 01) when compared with before treatment. Compared with the conventional treatment group, the decrement of CD62p, CD63, GPIIb/IIIa and vWF (P<0.05, P<0.01), and the increment of FMD and NO (both P<0.05) were more obvious in the TXL group. The aforesaid indices were more obviously different between 6-month treatment and 2-month treatment in the TXL group and the conventional treatment group (P<0.05, P<0.01). Seven patients suffered from angina, six from heart failure, three from ventricular tachycardiac (VT)/ventricular fibrillation (VF), and two died suddenly in the conventional treatment group after six months of treatment, while only one suffered from angina, one from heart failure, and none from VT/VF or died suddenly in the TXL treatment group after 6 months of treatment.
TXL could be used in the prevention and treatment of coronary thrombosis, protect the vascular endothelial functions, as well as improve the prognosis of ACS patients after PCI.21576918
Importance of phagosomal functionality for growth restriction of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in primary human macrophages.
Welin Amanda, Raffetseder Johanna, Eklund Daniel, Stendahl Olle, Lerm Maria
Journal of innate immunity
The best characterized survival mechanism of Mycobacterium tuberculosis inside the macrophage is the inhibition of phagosomal maturation. Phagosomal maturation involves several steps including fusion with lysosomes and acidification. However, it has not been elucidated which components of phagosomal maturation correlate with growth restriction of virulent mycobacteria in human macrophages, and we aimed to study this. We infected human monocyte-derived macrophages with M. tuberculosis and assessed bacterial replication, translocation of CD63 to the phagosome, and phagosomal acidification. We found that unstimulated human macrophages were able to control infection with M. tuberculosis upon inoculation at a low multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1, but not at a high MOI of 10. The low MOI resulted in a macrophage-controlled balance between host cells and bacteria. Both H37Rv and H37Ra infection, at high and low MOI, led to equally ineffective translocation of CD63 to the phagosome. On the other hand, acidification of mycobacterial phagosomes was more efficient at MOI 1 than 10 with both mycobacterial strains, consistent with a direct or indirect role for phagosomal acidification in restricting M. tuberculosis growth. Furthermore, inhibition of the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase as well as of cathepsin D led to enhanced mycobacterial replication inside the macrophage. This again shows the importance of phagosomal acidification for control of mycobacterial growth, through the activation of lysosomal hydrolases. We conclude that acidification and related functional aspects of the mature phagosome are important factors for restriction of M. tuberculosis replication in human macrophages.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.21572121
Kupffer cells are activated in cirrhotic portal hypertension and not normalised by TIPS.
Holland-Fischer Peter, Grønbæk Henning, Sandahl Thomas Damgaard, Moestrup Søren K, Riggio Oliviero, Ridola Lorenzo, Aagaard Niels Kristian, Møller Holger Jon, Vilstrup Hendrik
Gut
Hepatic macrophages (Kupffer cells) undergo inflammatory activation during the development of portal hypertension in experimental cirrhosis; this activation may play a pathogenic role or be an epiphenomenon. Our objective was to study serum soluble CD163 (sCD163), a sensitive marker of macrophage activation, before and after reduction of portal venous pressure gradient by insertion of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) in patients with cirrhosis.
sCD163 was measured in 11 controls and 36 patients before and 1, 4 and 26 weeks after TIPS. We used lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) levels as a marker of endotoxinaemia. Liver function and clinical status of the patients were assessed by galactose elimination capacity and Model for End Stage Liver Disease score.
The sCD163 concentration was more than threefold higher in the patients than in the controls (median 5.22 mg/l vs 1.45 mg/l, p<0.001). The sCD163 was linearly related to the portal venous pressure gradient (r(2)=0.24, p<0.001), also after adjustment for cirrhosis status. The sCD163 concentration was 12% higher in the hepatic than in the portal vein (p<0.02). The LBP level was 70% higher in the patients (52.2 vs 30.4 μg/l, p<0.001). During follow-up after TIPS, the sCD163 concentration did not change while LBP almost normalised.
Kupffer cells were activated in patients with liver cirrhosis in parallel with their portal hypertension. The activation was not alleviated by the mechanical reduction of portal hypertension and the decreasing signs of endotoxinaemia. The findings suggest that Kupffer cell activation is a constitutive event that may play a pathogenic role for portal hypertension.21569129
Harnessing engineered antibodies of the IgE class to combat malignancy: initial assessment of FcɛRI-mediated basophil activation by a tumour-specific IgE antibody to evaluate the risk of type I hypersensitivity.
Rudman S M, Josephs D H, Cambrook H, Karagiannis P, Gilbert A E, Dodev T, Hunt J, Koers A, Montes A, Taams L, Canevari S, Figini M, Blower P J, Beavil A J, Nicodemus C F, Corrigan C, Kaye S B, Nestle F O, Gould H J, Spicer J F, Karagiannis S N
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
IgE antibodies, sequestered into tissues and retained locally by the high-affinity IgE receptor, FcɛRI, on powerful effector cells such as mast cells, macrophages and eosinophils, may offer improvements in the therapy of solid tumours. The chimeric antibody, MOv18 IgE, against the human ovarian carcinoma antigen, folate receptor α (FRα), is more effective than its IgG1 counterpart in xenograft models of ovarian cancer. Although MOv18 IgE binds to a single epitope on FRα and cannot cross-link IgE receptors on basophils, there remains a risk that components in the circulation of ovarian cancer patients might cross-link FRα-MOv18-IgE-receptor-FcɛRI complexes on basophils to cause type I hypersensitivity.
To assess the propensity for MOv18 used in a therapeutic setting to cause FcɛRI-mediated type I hypersensitivity.
As validated readouts of the potential for MOv18 to cause FcɛRI-mediated type I hypersensitivity we measured release of a granule-stored mediator from a rat basophilic leukaemia cell line RBL SX-38 stably transfected with human tetrameric (αβγ2) FcɛRI, and induction of CD63 on blood basophils from patients with ovarian carcinoma and healthy controls ex vivo.
Serum FRα levels were increased in ovarian cancer patients compared with healthy controls. MOv18 IgE alone, or in the presence of its antigen recombinant human FRα, or of healthy volunteer (n=14) or ovarian carcinoma patient (n=32) sera, did not induce RBL SX-38 cell degranulation. Exposure to FRα-expressing ovarian tumour cells at target-to-effector ratios expected within tumours induced degranulation. MOv18 IgE did not induce expression of CD63 in blood basophils from either healthy volunteers (n=6), or cancer patients, despite detectable levels of circulating FRα (n=5).
These encouraging data are compatible with the hypothesis that, when ovarian carcinoma patients are treated with MOv18, FcɛRI-mediated activation of effector cells occurs within the tumour mass but not in the circulation mandating, with due caution, further pre-clinical studies.
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.21548445
Human basophils: a unique biological instrument to detect the allergenicity of food.
Sabato V, van Hengel A J, De Knop K J, Verweij M M, Hagendorens M M, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Schiavino D, Stevens W J, Ebo D G
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
Labeling of major food allergens is mandatory for the safety of allergic consumers. Although enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, polymerase chain reaction, and mass spectrometry are sensitive and specific instruments to detect trace amounts of food proteins, they cannot measure the ability of food constituents to trigger activation of mast cells or basophils.
We evaluated the basophil activation test as an instrument to determine the allergenic potential of trace amounts of food allergens in complex matrices. Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) allergy was selected as a proof-of-concept model.
The study population comprised 5 severely peanut-allergic patients (3 males/2 females; median age, 12 years) all sensitized to 3 major peanut allergens (Ara h 1, Ara h 2, and Ara h 3) and 5 peanut-tolerant individuals (2 males/3 females; median age, 8 years). Basophils from patients and controls were stimulated with pure peanut extract and blank and peanut-spiked (0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 ppm) biscuits (baking time 11, 16, 21, 26 minutes) and chocolate extracts.
Blank biscuits and chocolate did not induce cell activation in patients or controls. A comparison between patients and controls showed significantly higher activation of basophils after stimulation with 0.1 and 0.01 ppm of peanut-spiked biscuit at all baking times and peanut-spiked chocolate (P < .05).
The basophil activation test is a highly sensitive and specific tool to detect traces of functionally active food allergens. For biscuits, its accuracy seems independent of baking time. Furthermore, it allows even the most sensitive patients to be included in study protocols.21544995
[The quality of platelet concentrates in dependence on storage time before pathogen inactivation].
Bujno Magdalena, Lipska Alina, Zebrowska Agnieszka, Wróbel Jolanta, Gawrylak-Dryja Ewa, Nedzi Marta, Radziwon Piotr
Polski merkuriusz lekarski : organ Polskiego Towarzystwa Lekarskiego
Pathogen inactivation procedure performed just before distribution of platelet concentrates (PCs) may decrease costs caused by loss of these components due to relatively short expiry date.
To evaluate the quality of PCs pathogen inactivated on the first or the fifth day of storage.
PCs preparated from buffy-coats were suspended in platelet additive solution (Intersol, Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Belgium). The photochemical pathogen inactivation was performed on the 1st or the 5th day of storage using amotosalen and UVA (Cerus, Europe BV). PCs were stored for 7 days.
There were observed increased expression of CD62 and CD63, elevated activity of LDH and lower concentration of glucose in PCs pathogen inactivated on day 1 compare to the control group. PCs pathogen inactivated on day 5 showed decreased expression of CD62 and CD63 compare to the control group. There were no significant differences in platelet number, pH, lactate concentration, hypotonic shock response and release of platelet derived microparticles in both groups of pathogen inactivated PCs.
Time of storage of PCs before pathogen inactivation has no significant impact on PCs quality. Pathogen inactivation procedure performed just after having received request for PCs is more cost effective than the routine pathogen inactivation in all PCs before storage.21530870
The diagnostic value of basophil activation test in patients with an immediate hypersensitivity reaction to radiocontrast media.
Pinnobphun Panwas, Buranapraditkun Supranee, Kampitak Thatchai, Hirankarn Nattiya, Klaewsongkram Jettanong
Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology
No available test diagnoses allergic reactions to radiocontrast media (RCM). The basophil activation test (BAT) has been introduced for the diagnosis of both immunoglobulin (Ig) E and non-IgE-dependent mast cell degranulation, but its value to diagnose immediate RCM reactions is still unknown.
This study aims to evaluate the diagnostic value of BAT in immediate RCM hypersensitivity.
The BATs were performed in 26 patients with immediate RCM reactions and in 43 specimens from healthy volunteers. The sample's whole blood was incubated with the responsible RCM and % activated (CD63+/CCR3+) basophils were analyzed by flow cytometry. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve analysis was performed to calculate the optimal cutoff value of activated basophils to diagnose patients with RCM hypersensitivity.
The incubation of blood with RCM yielded significantly higher activated basophil percentages in patients with a history of immediate RCM reactions than in normal controls with both 1:100 and 1:10 dilutions (13.11% vs. 2.71%, P value = .01; and 19.23% vs. 3.73%, P = .001, respectively). Both % activated basophils and stimulation index (SI) had acceptable discrimination powers to diagnose RCM hypersensitivity. The area under the curve was 0.79 (95% CI 0.67-0.91, P = .000) by using SI as the diagnostic criteria with 1:100 dilution of RCM. The specificity of the test ranged from 88.4% to 100%.
Our study demonstrated the potential of BAT as a diagnostic tool for an immediate RCM hypersensitivity, particularly as a confirmation test. Further studies are required to confirm the test accuracy and identify a patient's predisposing factors.
Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.21527913
LMP1 association with CD63 in endosomes and secretion via exosomes limits constitutive NF-κB activation.
Verweij Frederik J, van Eijndhoven Monique A J, Hopmans Erik S, Vendrig Tineke, Wurdinger Tom, Cahir-McFarland Ellen, Kieff Elliott, Geerts Dirk, van der Kant Rik, Neefjes Jacques, Middeldorp Jaap M, Pegtel D Michiel
The EMBO journal
The ubiquitous Epstein Barr virus (EBV) exploits human B-cell development to establish a persistent infection in ∼90% of the world population. Constitutive activation of NF-κB by the viral oncogene latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) has an important role in persistence, but is a risk factor for EBV-associated lymphomas. Here, we demonstrate that endogenous LMP1 escapes degradation upon accumulation within intraluminal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes and secretion via exosomes. LMP1 associates and traffics with the intracellular tetraspanin CD63 into vesicles that lack MHC II and sustain low cholesterol levels, even in 'cholesterol-trapping' conditions. The lipid-raft anchoring sequence FWLY, nor ubiquitylation of the N-terminus, controls LMP1 sorting into exosomes. Rather, C-terminal modifications that retain LMP1 in Golgi compartments preclude assembly within CD63-enriched domains and/or exosomal discharge leading to NF-κB overstimulation. Interference through shRNAs further proved the antagonizing role of CD63 in LMP1-mediated signalling. Thus, LMP1 exploits CD63-enriched microdomains to restrain downstream NF-κB activation by promoting trafficking in the endosomal-exosomal pathway. CD63 is thus a critical mediator of LMP1 function in- and outside-infected (tumour) cells.21525379
Microparticles (ectosomes) shed by stored human platelets downregulate macrophages and modify the development of dendritic cells.
Sadallah Salima, Eken Ceylan, Martin Perrine J, Schifferli Jürg A
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Microparticles (MP) shed by platelets (PLT) during storage have procoagulant activities, but little is known about their properties to modify inflammation or immunity. In this study, we studied the capacity of MP present in PLT concentrates to alter the function of macrophages and dendritic cells (DC). The size of the purified MP was between 100 and 1000 nm, and they expressed phosphatidylserine; surface proteins of PLT (CD61, CD36, CD47), including complement inhibitors (CD55, CD59), but not CD63; and proteins acquired from plasma (C1q, C3 fragments, factor H). These characteristics suggest that the MP shed by PLT are formed by budding from the cell surface, corresponding to ectosomes. The purified PLT ectosomes (PLT-Ect) reduced the release of TNF-α and IL-10 by macrophages activated with LPS or zymosan A. In addition, PLT-Ect induced the immediate release of TGF-β from macrophages, a release that was not modified by LPS or zymosan A. Macrophages had a reduced TNF-α release even 24 h after their exposure to PLT-Ect, suggesting that PLT-Ect induced a modification of the differentiation of macrophages. Similarly, the conventional 6-d differentiation of monocytes to immature DC by IL-4 and GM-CSF was modified by the presence of PLT-Ect during the first 2 d. Immature DC expressed less HLA-DP DQ DR and CD80 and lost part of their phagocytic activity, and their LPS-induced maturation was downmodulated when exposed to PLT-Ect. These data indicate that PLT-Ect shed by stored PLT have intrinsic properties that modify macrophage and DC differentiation toward less reactive states.21521534
Down-regulation of TM4SF is associated with the metastatic potential of gastric carcinoma TM4SF members in gastric carcinoma.
Chen Zhouxun, Gu Suchen, Trojanowicz Bogusz, Liu Naxin, Zhu Guanbao, Dralle Henning, Hoang-Vu Cuong
World journal of surgical oncology
The aim of this study was to clarify the clinical significance of TM4SF members CD9, CD63 and CD82 in human gastric carcinoma.
By employing RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, we studied the expression of CD9, CD63 and CD82 in 49 paired tissue specimens of normal gastric mucosa and carcinoma. All tissues were obtained from patients who underwent curative surgery.
All normal gastric epithelium and gastric ulcer tissues strongly expressed transcripts and proteins of CD9, CD63 and CD82 as compared with corresponding controls. We found a significant correlation between CD63 mRNA level and different pM statuses (P = 0.036). Carcinomas in M0 stage revealed a stronger expression of CD63 than carcinomas in M1 stage. Expression of CD9 protein was found significantly stronger in pN0, pM0 than in advanced pN stages (P = 0.03), pM1 (P = 0.013), respectively. We found the relationship between CD63 expression, gender (p = 0.09) and nodal status (p = 0.028), respectively. Additionally, advanced and metastasized tumor tissues revealed significantly down-regulated CD82 protein expression (p = 0.033 and p = 0, respectively), which correlated with the tumor pTNM stage (p = 0.001).
The reduction of CD9, CD63 and CD82 expression are indicators for the metastatic potential of gastric carcinoma cells. Unlike their expression in other tumor types, the constitutive expression of CD63 may indicate that this factor does play a direct role in human gastric carcinogenesis.21520404
Evaluation of basophil activation in mastocytosis with Hymenoptera venom anaphylaxis.
González-de-Olano D, Alvarez-Twose I, Morgado J M, Esteban López M I, Vega Castro A, Díaz de Durana M D Alonso, Sánchez-Muñoz L, Matito A, de la Hoz Caballer B, Sanz M L, Orfao A, Escribano L
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Basophil activation tests (BATs) have been demonstrated to be useful in detecting IgE-mediated sensitization by measuring basophil activation surface markers (CD63 and CD203c). Hymenoptera venom is one of the best known mediators-release trigger in patients with systemic mastocytosis (SM). The aim of this study was to investigate the use of BATs as an additional diagnostic tool in patients with mastocytosis suffering from hymenoptera venom anaphylaxis (HVA).
A total of 22 patients with history of HVA and SM, together with a group of 11 patients with HVA in whom SM was ruled out after a complete bone marrow study, were analyzed.
Among 11 SM patients who had specific serum IgE (sIgE) against hymenoptera venom and an evaluable BAT, a positive BAT was found in nine. Additionally, a positive BAT was detected in three of seven patients who had no sIgE. These three patients had low levels of total IgE compared with control population (mean of 20 vs. 78 IU/mL); one had discontinued immunotherapy after 5 years, when sIgE levels had turned negative, and, in the other two patients, BAT identified the culprit insect.
BAT is a useful complementary diagnostic tool to sIgE in mastocytosis patients with HVA, and it may contribute to predict or confirm these nearly fatal reactions, especially before discontinuing venom immunotherapy in patients who are negative for skin tests or sIgE or display low total IgE levels; in such cases, it also provides evidence on the culprit insect prompting HVA.
Copyright © 2010 International Clinical Cytometry Society.21518044
Basophil allergen threshold sensitivity, CD-sens, is a measure of allergen sensitivity in asthma.
Dahlén B, Nopp A, Johansson S G O, Eduards M, Skedinger M, Adédoyin J
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Allergic asthma is IgE-mediated and the IgE-sensitisation is usually demonstrated by skin prick tests (SPT) and IgE antibody determinations in serum. The SPT and IgE-antibody values do not directly predict if the allergy clinically contributes to the asthma. There is therefore a need for new objective tests that may indicate the clinical importance of an IgE-sensitisation.
To evaluate basophil allergen threshold sensitivity (CD-sens) as a measure of allergen sensitivity in allergic asthma.
Twenty-six subjects with stable, intermittent allergic asthma were tested with SPT and spirometry, and methacholine and allergen inhalation challenges to determine methacholine PD(20) (provocative dose causing a 20% drop in forced expiratory volume in 1 s) and allergen PD(20) . The results were compared with CD-sens and serological parameters, i.e. IgE- and IgG4 antibodies to the relevant allergens.
A significant correlation was found between CD-sens and allergen PD(20) (P = 0.01; r = 0.49; n = 26) as well as between CD-sens and the ratio of allergen PD(20) to methacholine PD(20) (P = 0.007; r = 0.52; n = 26). In patients with a moderate to low degree of bronchial hyperresponsiveness there was an excellent correlation (P = 0.0001; r = 0.88, n = 13) between CD-sens and allergen sensitivity. No relation to either allergen PD(20) or the ratio was found for basophil allergen reactivity measured as CD63 up-regulation at high concentrations of the respective allergen.
CD-sens was found to be an objective marker of airway allergen sensitivity in stable allergic asthmatics, that may be used to predict airway responsiveness when bronchial challenge tests cannot be performed.
© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.21505438
Unidirectional transfer of microRNA-loaded exosomes from T cells to antigen-presenting cells.
Mittelbrunn María, Gutiérrez-Vázquez Cristina, Villarroya-Beltri Carolina, González Susana, Sánchez-Cabo Fátima, González Manuel Ángel, Bernad Antonio, Sánchez-Madrid Francisco
Nature communications
The immune synapse is an exquisitely evolved means of communication between T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs) during antigen recognition. Recent evidence points to the transfer of RNA via exosomes as a novel mode of intercellular communication. Here we show that exosomes of T, B and dendritic immune cells contain microRNA (miRNA) repertoires that differ from those of their parent cells. We investigate whether miRNAs are exchanged during cognate immune interactions, and demonstrate the existence of antigen-driven unidirectional transfer of miRNAs from the T cell to the APC, mediated by the delivery of CD63+ exosomes on immune synapse formation. Inhibition of exosome production by targeting neutral sphingomyelinase-2 impairs transfer of miRNAs to APCs. Moreover, miRNAs transferred during immune synapsis are able to modulate gene expression in recipient cells. Thus, our results support a mechanism of cellular communication involving antigen-dependent, unidirectional intercellular transfer of miRNAs by exosomes during immune synapsis.21496440
[A clinicopathological analysis of pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis].
Gao Jun, Zhu Peiju, Zhang Shangfu, Zhao Sha, Lu Changli, Chen Huijiao
Zhongguo fei ai za zhi = Chinese journal of lung cancer
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (PLAM) is a rare tumor with unique clinicopathological features. The aim of this study is to investigate the clinicopathological features, the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Three cases of PLAM were analyzed by light microscopy, immunohistochemistry and their clinical data, and the relative literatures were reviewed.
Three cases of patients suffered from PLAM were the women in their reproductive aged, from 27 years to 45 years (mean 37.7 years), two cases of the HRCT showed bilateral diffuse cystic airspaces changed, and one case was the pneumothorax. The histopathological examination revealed the tumor was composed of the variably sized cystic spaces are lined by plaque-like or nodular aggregates of endothelial cells and the hyperplasia, smooth-muscle-like spindle cells which was along with the bronchi and the vessels. The immunohistochemistry showed that Des, Caldes, SMA, MSA, HMB-45, CD63, Vim, ER and PR were positive in the hyperplasia spindle cells, and there was no expression of MRAT-1. The FVIII, CD34 were positive in the capillary endothelial cells, and the D2-40 was positive in the lymphatic vessels. All the patients were alive without the recrudescence of the PLAM since the diagnosis, about 3 months to 25 months, and there was no LAM in their other systems.
The most significant histopathological feature of pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis was the progressive invasion of smooth muscle cells into the lymphatic vessels, and the blood vessels. The majority of the cases occur in the lungs of the women in the predominantly premenopausal and middle-age. It is a poor prognosis due to the progressive respiratory failure.21492184
The effect of pathogen reduction technology (Mirasol) on platelet quality when treated in additive solution with low plasma carryover.
Johnson L, Winter K M, Reid S, Hartkopf-Theis T, Marschner S, Goodrich R P, Marks D C
Vox sanguinis
Pathogen reduction technologies (PRT) for platelets are now compatible with both plasma and platelet additive solutions (PAS). The aim of this study was to examine the effect of PRT on the platelet storage lesion, in the presence of PAS with low plasma carryover.
PRT-treated (Mirasol) and untreated buffy coat-derived platelet concentrates prepared in 28% plasma/PAS-IIIM were evaluated using in vitro cell quality parameters on days 1, 2, 5, and 7 post-collection.
At day 5, there were no significant differences between control and PRT treated platelets for swirl, viability, pO(2) , pCO(2) , mean platelet volume and adenosine diphosphate-induced aggregation. PRT treatment did not affect the functional integrity of the mitochondria. However, PRT resulted in a decrease in pH and enhancement of platelet glycolysis and activation, evidenced by increased glucose consumption and lactate production rates, increased expression of CD62P, CD63, annexin V staining and increased secretion of cytokines (P < 0.05). Hypotonic shock response and aggregation in response to collagen were also significantly reduced in PRT treated platelets (P < 0.05).
Despite the observed differences in platelet metabolism and activation observed following PRT treatment in PAS and low plasma carryover, the results suggest that treatment and storage of platelets in PAS is no more detrimental to platelets than treatment and storage in plasma.
© 2011 The Author(s). Vox Sanguinis © 2011 International Society of Blood Transfusion.21490416
An unexpected role for autophagy in degranulation of mast cells.
Nakano Hiroyasu, Ushio Hiroko
Autophagy
Mast cells play a crucial role in allergic inflammatory reactions through releasing cytosolic granules upon antigen stimulation. However, the mechanisms underlying maturation and release of secretory granules are not fully understood. We found that autophagy is constitutively induced in mast cells under full nutrition conditions, and type II LC3 (LC3-II), a marker for autophagosomes, localizes on secretory granules. While deletion of Atg7 does not impair the development of bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs), Atg7-deficient BMMCs show severe impairment of degranulation, but not cytokine production, upon antigen stimulation. Moreover we found that LC3-II, but not LC3-I, colocalizes with CD63, a marker for secretory lysosomes and is released extracellularly along with degranulation in wild-type BMMCs, but not Atg7-deficient BMMCs. Finally, passive cutaneous anaphylaxis reactions are almost completely abolished in mast celldeficient mice reconstituted with Atg7-deficient BMMCs. Collectively, these results suggest that autophagy is not essential for the development, but plays a crucial role in degranulation, of mast cells.21487111
Small molecule Toll-like receptor 7 agonists localize to the MHC class II loading compartment of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.
Russo Carla, Cornella-Taracido Ivan, Galli-Stampino Luisa, Jain Rishi, Harrington Edmund, Isome Yuko, Tavarini Simona, Sammicheli Chiara, Nuti Sandra, Mbow M Lamine, Valiante Nicholas M, Tallarico John, De Gregorio Ennio, Soldaini Elisabetta
Blood
TLR7 and TLR8 are intracellular sensors activated by single-stranded RNA species generated during viral infections. Various synthetic small molecules can also activate TLR7 or TLR8 or both through an unknown mechanism. Notably, direct interaction between small molecules and TLR7 or TLR8 has never been shown. To shed light on how small molecule agonists target TLRs, we labeled 2 imidazoquinolines, resiquimod and imiquimod, and one adenine-based compound, SM360320, with 2 different fluorophores [5(6) carboxytetramethylrhodamine and Alexa Fluor 488] and monitored their intracellular localization in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). All fluorescent compounds induced the production of IFN-α, TNF-α, and IL-6 and the up-regulation of CD80 and CD86 by pDCs showing they retained TLR7-stimulating activity. Confocal imaging of pDCs showed that, similar to CpG-B, all compounds concentrated in the MHC class II loading compartment (MIIC), identified as lysosome-associated membrane protein 1(+), CD63, and HLA-DR(+) endosomes. Treatment of pDCs with bafilomycin A, an antagonist of the vacuolar-type proton ATPase controlling endosomal acidification, prevented the accumulation of small molecule TLR7 agonists, but not of CpG-B, in the MIIC. These results indicate that a pH-driven concentration of small molecule TLR7 agonists in the MIIC is required for pDC activation.21486179
Amelogenin enhances the proliferation of cementoblast lineage cells.
Kunimatsu Ryo, Tanimoto Kotaro, Tanne Yuki, Kamiya Takashi, Ohkuma Satoru, Huang Yu-Ching, Yoshimi Yuki, Miyauchi Mutsumi, Takata Takashi, Tanne Kazuo
Journal of periodontology
It is well known that enamel matrix proteins play a crucial role in tooth root formation and amelogenesis. Because amelogenin is a major enamel matrix protein, it is assumed that amelogenin also affects the metabolism of cementum. However, the biologic functions of amelogenin in cementoblasts remain unclear. The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of recombinant human full-length amelogenin (rh174) on the proliferation of cultured human cementoblast-like (HCEM) and human periodontal ligament (HPDL) cells.
HCEM and HPDL cells were cultured and treated with 100 ng/mL rh174 in the presence or absence of an anti-cluster of differentiation (CD) 63 blocking antibody. Cell proliferation was evaluated using a cell proliferation enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine kit and quantification of the cell number by 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2 H-tetrazolium-inner salt assay. The phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) 1/2 was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blot analysis.
The proliferation of HCEM and HPDL cells was enhanced significantly (P <0.05) by treatment with rh174, and inhibited significantly (P <0.05) by the addition of anti-CD63 blocking antibody. In addition, the ratio of phosphorylated ERK1/2 to total ERK1/2 became significantly larger (P <0.05) by treatment with rh174, and was reduced significantly by the addition of anti-CD63 blocking antibody in both HCEM and HPDL cells.
The results show that rh174 interacts with CD63, and rh174/CD63 interaction activates the ERK1/2 signaling pathway, enhancing the proliferation activities of HCEM and HPDL cells.21464080
Cooperative role for tetraspanins in adhesin-mediated attachment of bacterial species to human epithelial cells.
Green Luke R, Monk Peter N, Partridge Lynda J, Morris Paul, Gorringe Andrew R, Read Robert C
Infection and immunity
The tetraspanins are a superfamily of transmembrane proteins with diverse functions and can form extended microdomains within the plasma membrane in conjunction with partner proteins, which probably includes receptors for bacterial adhesins. Neisseria meningitidis, the causative agent of meningococcal disease, attaches to host nasopharyngeal epithelial cells via type IV pili and opacity (Opa) proteins. We examined the role of tetraspanin function in Neisseria meningitidis adherence to epithelial cells. Tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD151 were expressed by HEC-1-B and DETROIT 562 cells. Coincubation of cells with antibodies against all three tetraspanin molecules used individually or in combination, with recombinant tetraspanin extracellular domains (EC2), or with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) significantly reduced adherence of Neisseria meningitidis. In contrast, recombinant CD81, a different tetraspanin, had no effect on meningococcal adherence. Antitetraspanin antibodies reduced the adherence to epithelial cells of Neisseria meningitidis strain derivatives expressing Opa and pili significantly more than isogenic strains lacking these determinants. Adherence to epithelial cells of strains of Staphylococcus aureus, Neisseria lactamica, Escherichia coli, and Streptococcus pneumoniae was also reduced by pretreatment of cells with tetraspanin antibodies and recombinant proteins. These data suggest that tetraspanins are required for optimal function of epithelial adhesion platforms containing specific receptors for Neisseria meningitidis and potentially for multiple species of bacteria.21462811
The basophil activation test as a promising diagnostic tool in hypersensitivity to chironomid larvae.
Cabrera-Freitag P, Ferrer M, Martínez R, Javaloyes G, Sanz M L
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
21461759
CD164 and other recently discovered activation markers as promising tools for allergy diagnosis: what's new?
Chirumbolo Salvatore
Clinical and experimental medicine
21443446
Effect of acupuncture on allergen-induced basophil activation in patients with atopic eczema:a pilot trial.
Pfab Florian, Athanasiadis Georgios I, Huss-Marp Johannes, Fuqin Jiang, Heuser Beate, Cifuentes Liliana, Brockow Knut, Schober Wolfgang, Konstantinow Alexander, Irnich Dominik, Behrendt Heidrun, Ring Johannes, Ollert Markus
Journal of alternative and complementary medicine (New York, N.Y.)
The crucial symptom of atopic eczema is itch. Acupuncture has been shown to exhibit a significant effect on experimental itch; however, studies focusing on clinical itch in atopic eczema and corresponding mechanisms are lacking. The study design was a unicenter, single-blinded (observer), prospective, randomized clinical pilot trial with an additional experimental part. In 10 patients with atopic eczema, we investigated the effect of acupuncture treatment (n = 5) compared to no treatment (n = 5) on itch intensity and in vitro basophil CD63 expression upon allergen stimulation (house dust mite and timothy grass pollen) in a pilot trial.
Mean itch intensity in a visual analog scale was rated significantly lower in the acupuncture group (-25% ± 26% [day 15-day 0]; -24% ± 31% [day 33-day 0]) than in the control group (15% ± 6% [day 15-day 0]; 29% ± 9% [day 33-day 0]). From day 0 (before treatment) to day 15 (after 5 acupuncture treatments) as well as day 33 (after 10 acupuncture treatments), the acupuncture group showed less CD63 positive basophils than the control group regarding stimulation with house dust mite and grass pollen allergen at various concentrations (5 ng/mL, 1 ng/mL, 0.5 ng/mL, or 0.25 ng/mL).
Our results show a reduction of itch intensity and of in vitro allergen-induced basophil activation in patients with atopic eczema after acupuncture treatment. Reducing basophil activation can be a further tool in investigating the mechanisms of action of acupuncture in immunoglobulin E-mediated allergy. Due to the limited number of patients included in our pilot trial, further studies are needed to strengthen the hypothesis.21428933
Tetraspanin functions during HIV-1 and influenza virus replication.
Thali Markus
Biochemical Society transactions
By virtue of their multiple interactions with partner proteins and due to their strong propensity to multimerize, tetraspanins create scaffolds in membranes, recruiting or excluding specific proteins needed for particular cellular processes. We and others have shown that (i) HIV-1 assembles at, and buds through, membrane areas that are enriched in tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD81 and CD82, and (ii) the presence of these proteins at exit sites and in viral particles inhibits virus-induced membrane fusion. In the present paper, I review these findings and briefly discuss the results of our ongoing investigations that are aimed at elucidating when and how tetraspanins regulate this fusion process and how such control affects virus spreading. Finally, I give a preview of studies that we have initiated more recently and which aim to delineate exactly when CD81 functions during the replication of another enveloped RNA virus: influenza virus.21426584
Helicobacter pylori phagosome maturation in primary human macrophages.
Borlace Glenn N, Jones Hilary F, Keep Stacey J, Butler Ross N, Brooks Doug A
Gut pathogens
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a micro-aerophilic, spiral-shaped, motile bacterium that is the principal cause of gastric and duodenal ulcers in humans and is a major risk factor for the development of gastric cancer. Despite provoking a strong innate and adaptive immune response in the host, H. pylori persists in the gastric mucosa, avoiding eradication by macrophages and other phagocytic cells, which are recruited to the site of infection. Here we have characterised the critical degradative process of phagosome maturation in primary human macrophages for five genotypically and phenotypically distinct clinical strains of H. pylori.
All of the H. pylori strains examined showed some disruption to the phagosome maturation process, when compared to control E. coli. The early endosome marker EEA1 and late endosome marker Rab7 were retained on H. pylori phagosomes, while the late endosome-lysosome markers CD63, LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 were acquired in an apparently normal manner. Acquisition of EEA1 by H. pylori phagosomes appeared to occur by two distinct, strain specific modes. H. pylori strains that were negative for the cancer associated virulence factor CagA were detected in phagosomes that recruited large amounts of EEA1 relative to Rab5, compared to CagA positive strains. There were also strain specific differences in the timing of Rab7 acquisition which correlated with differences in the rate of intracellular trafficking of phagosomes and the timing of megasome formation. Megasomes were observed for all of the H. pylori strains examined.
H. pylori appeared to disrupt the normal process of phagosome maturation in primary human macrophages, appearing to block endosome fission. This resulted in the formation of a hybrid phagosome-endosome-lysosome compartment, which we propose has reduced degradative capacity. Reduced killing by phagocytes is consistent with the persistence of H. pylori in the host, and would contribute to the chronic stimulation of the inflammatory immune response, which underlies H. pylori-associated disease.21421855
Leptin enhances survival and induces migration, degranulation, and cytokine synthesis of human basophils.
Suzukawa Maho, Nagase Hiroyuki, Ogahara Ikuko, Han Kaiyu, Tashimo Hiroyuki, Shibui Akiko, Koketsu Rikiya, Nakae Susumu, Yamaguchi Masao, Ohta Ken
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Basophils are the rarest leukocytes in human blood, but they are now recognized as one of the most important immunomodulatory as well as effector cells in allergic inflammation. Leptin, a member of the IL-6 cytokine family, has metabolic effects as an adipokine, and it is also known to participate in the pathogenesis of inflammatory reactions. Because there is an epidemiologic relationship between obesity and allergy, we examined whether basophil functions are modified by leptin. We found that human basophils express leptin receptor (LepR) at both the mRNA and surface protein levels, which were upregulated by IL-33. Leptin exerted strong effects on multiple basophil functions. It induced a strong migratory response in human basophils, similar in potency to that of basophil-active chemokines. Also, leptin enhanced survival of human basophils, although its potency was less than that of IL-3. Additionally, CD63, a basophil activation marker expressed on the cell surface, was upregulated by leptin, an effect that was neutralized by blocking of LepR. Assessments of basophil degranulation and cytokine synthesis found that leptin showed a strong priming effect on human basophil degranulation in response to FcεRI aggregation and induced Th2, but not Th1, cytokine production by the cells. In summary, the present findings indicate that leptin may be a key molecule mediating the effects of adipocytes on inflammatory cells such as basophils by binding to LepR and activating the cellular functions, presumably exacerbating allergic inflammation.21406263
An integrated proteomics and genomics analysis to unravel a heterogeneous platelet secretion defect.
Di Michele Michela, Thys Chantal, Waelkens Etienne, Overbergh Lut, D'Hertog Wannes, Mathieu Chantal, De Vos Rita, Peerlinck Kathelijne, Van Geet Chris, Freson Kathleen
Journal of proteomics
Eight patients with clinical bleeding problems have evidence for platelet storage pool disease as they present with impaired platelet aggregation and secretion with low concentrations of ADP and collagen and an absence of second phase aggregation with epinephrine. Electron microscopy analysis further showed a reduced but not absent amount of platelet dense granules, and CD63 staining was decreased compared to healthy controls. The presence of alpha granules and CD62P expression after platelet activation was normal. This work aimed at identifying differentially expressed proteins in the platelet releasate and its remaining pellet after activation with A23187 and TRAP in patients and controls using DIGE-based proteomic technology. We identified 44 differentially expressed proteins in patients and the altered expression for some of them was confirmed by immunoblot analysis. Most of these proteins belong to the class of cytoskeleton-related proteins. In addition, 29 cytoskeleton-related genes showed an altered expression in platelet mRNA from patients using a real-time PCR array. In conclusion, our study shows that the dense granule secretion defect in patients with platelet storage pool disease is highly heterogeneous with evidence of an underlying cytoskeleton defect.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.21370213
Platelet function in pre-eclampsia.
Kazmi Rashid S, Cooper Alan J, Lwaleed Bashir A
Seminars in thrombosis and hemostasis
Pronounced hemostatic changes occur during pregnancy, and the balance shifts markedly in favor of hypercoagulability. Although primarily a result of a marked rise in the levels of several procoagulants and a fall in some natural anticoagulants, platelet activation also contributes to this prothrombotic tendency. Several studies have confirmed the accentuation of platelet activation in pre-eclampsia (P-EC), which remains an important obstetric complication affecting ~2 to 4% of pregnancies. Although there is still a long way to go, significant inroads have been made in the understanding of this enigmatic condition. Whereas the pathogenesis of P-EC is protean and involves a complex interplay of placental and maternal tissues, platelet activation is likely to contribute to several clinical features. Several techniques have been used to assess platelet activation in P-EC. Detection of aberrations of platelet function and activation appear to have predictive value for its diagnosis. The findings also lend support to the use of antiplatelet agents as prophylaxis in those women with a high risk of developing the condition.
© Thieme Medical Publishers.21347740
Case Report: perioperative immediate hypersensitivity involves not only allergy but also mastocytosis.
Renauld Valérie, Goudet Véronique, Mouton-Faivre Claudie, Debaene Bertrand, Dewachter Pascale
Canadian journal of anaesthesia = Journal canadien d'anesthésie
We report a case of drug-induced immediate hypersensitivity occurring after atracurium injection in a patient with cutaneous mastocytosis.
A 69-yr-old woman was scheduled for hysterectomy. She was premedicated with hydroxyzine, and anesthesia was induced with sufentanil, propofol, and atracurium. Within two to three minutes following the injection of atracurium, the patient experienced an episode of generalized erythema and arterial hypotension associated with tachycardia. No bronchospasm was observed. Her cardiovascular signs resolved spontaneously within five minutes, while her cutaneous signs disappeared within 30 min. Anesthesia and surgery remained uneventful. The patient's serum tryptase levels were measured at different time points following the clinical reaction. An in vitro flow cytometry-based basophil activation test was performed with atracurium, and in vivo skin tests to latex and all drugs which were administered just before the clinical reaction were also done. The serum tryptase showed increased concentrations that remained elevated for 24 hr, 48 hr, and even four weeks after the clinical reaction. Atracurium did not induce either CD63 or CD203c upregulation, and the skin tests were negative in response to the medications received (propofol, sufentanil, and atracurium) as well as to latex.
Allergic hypersensitivity to atracurium was ruled out. Increased tryptase concentrations following the clinical reaction, persistent increased levels of basal serum tryptase, and negative skin tests suggested the onset of mast cell degranulation in a patient with mastocytosis. Immediate reaction occurring in patients with mastocytosis should be investigated in order to identify the mechanism of the reaction, either histamine release due to the disease itself or due to a concurrent drug/agent-induced IgE-mediated mechanism.21333342
Crucial role for autophagy in degranulation of mast cells.
Ushio Hiroko, Ueno Takashi, Kojima Yuko, Komatsu Masaaki, Tanaka Satoshi, Yamamoto Akitsugu, Ichimura Yoshinobu, Ezaki Junji, Nishida Keigo, Komazawa-Sakon Sachiko, Niyonsaba François, Ishii Tetsuro, Yanagawa Toru, Kominami Eiki, Ogawa Hideoki, Okumura Ko, Nakano Hiroyasu
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Autophagy plays a crucial role in controlling various biological responses including starvation, homeostatic turnover of long-lived proteins, and invasion of bacteria. However, a role for autophagy in development and/or function of mast cells is unknown.
To investigate a role for autophagy in mast cells, we generated bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) from mice lacking autophagy related gene (Atg) 7, an essential enzyme for autophagy induction.
Bone marrow-derived mast cells were generated from bone marrow cells of control and IFN-inducible Atg7-deficient mice, and morphologic and functional analyses were performed.
We found that conversion of type I to type II light chain (LC3)-II, a hallmark of autophagy, was constitutively induced in mast cells under full nutrient conditions, and LC3-II localized in secretory granules of mast cells. Although deletion of Atg7 did not impair the development of BMMCs, Atg7(-/-) BMMCs showed severe impairment of degranulation, but not cytokine production on FcεRI cross-linking. Intriguingly, LC3-II but not LC3-I was co-localized with CD63, a secretory lysosomal marker, and was released extracellularly along with degranulation in Atg7(+/+) but not Atg7(-/-) BMMCs. Moreover, passive cutaneous anaphylaxis reactions were severely impaired in mast cell-deficient WBB6F1-W/W(V) mice reconstituted with Atg7(-/-) BMMCs compared with Atg7(+/+) BMMCs.
These results suggest that autophagy is not essential for the development but plays a crucial role in degranulation of mast cells. Thus, autophagy might be a potential target to treat allergic diseases in which mast cells are critically involved.
Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.21326294
Skin-depigmenting agent monobenzone induces potent T-cell autoimmunity toward pigmented cells by tyrosinase haptenation and melanosome autophagy.
van den Boorn Jasper G, Picavet Daisy I, van Swieten Paul F, van Veen Henk A, Konijnenberg Debby, van Veelen Peter A, van Capel Toni, Jong Esther C de, Reits Eric A, Drijfhout Jan W, Bos Jan D, Melief Cornelis J M, Luiten Rosalie M
The Journal of investigative dermatology
In this study, we report the previously unknown mechanism of inducing robust anti-melanoma immunity by the vitiligo-inducing compound monobenzone. We show monobenzone to increase melanocyte and melanoma cell immunogenicity by forming quinone-haptens to the tyrosinase protein and by inducing the release of tyrosinase- and melanoma antigen recognized by T cells-1 (MART-1)-containing CD63+ exosomes following melanosome oxidative stress induction. Monobenzone further augments the processing and shedding of melanocyte-differentiation antigens by inducing melanosome autophagy and enhanced tyrosinase ubiquitination, ultimately activating dendritic cells, which induced cytotoxic human melanoma-reactive T cells. These T cells effectively eradicate melanoma in vivo, as we have reported previously. Monobenzone thereby represents a promising and readily applicable compound for immunotherapy in melanoma patients.21315401
A post-entry role for CD63 in early HIV-1 replication.
Li Guangyu, Dziuba Natallia, Friedrich Brian, Murray James L, Ferguson Monique R
Virology
Macrophages and CD4(+) lymphocytes are the major reservoirs for HIV-1 infection. CD63 is a tetraspanin transmembrane protein, which has been shown to play an essential role during HIV-1 replication in macrophages. In this study, we further confirm the requirement of CD63 in early HIV-1 replication events in both macrophages and a CD4(+) cell line. Further analysis revealed that viral attachment and cell-cell fusion were unaffected by CD63 silencing. However, CD63-depleted macrophages showed a significant decrease in the initiation and completion of HIV-1 reverse transcription, affecting subsequent events of the HIV-1 life cycle. Integration of HIV-1 cDNA as well as the formation of 2-LTR circles was notably reduced. Reporter assays showed that CD63 down regulation reduced production of the early HIV protein Tat. In agreement, CD63 silencing also inhibited production of the late protein p24. These findings suggest that CD63 plays an early post-entry role prior to or at the reverse transcription step.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.21293144
Basophil responsiveness and clinical picture of acetylsalicylic acid intolerance.
Korosec Peter, Mavsar Nusa, Bajrovic Nissera, Silar Mira, Mrhar Ales, Kosnik Mitja
International archives of allergy and immunology
Exposure to acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) may exacerbate respiratory or skin diseases or induce anaphylactoid reactions in apparently healthy individuals. We wanted to evaluate specific responsiveness of basophils to ASA in correlation with the clinical picture.
We performed a prospective single-blind study of 59 subjects involved in clinical evaluation and/or ASA provocation testing. Whole blood basophils were stained with anti-CD63/CD123/HLA-DR mAbs after stimulation with 0.25 or 1 mg/ml ASA.
We found that 40 subjects were ASA tolerant and 19 were ASA intolerant. Both groups had comparable manifestations of asthma and/or rhinitis (13 in the tolerant and 9 in the intolerant group). Intolerant subjects showed significantly higher basophil responsiveness to ASA in comparison to tolerant subjects, which was concentration-dependent in both groups. The ratio between responses at 1 mg/ml of ASA and at baseline (activation index) was analyzed according to the clinical picture. We demonstrate that the activation index was higher only in the intolerant subjects with anaphylactoid reactions, but not in a subgroup of subjects with asthma/rhinitis. The ROC calculations show that the optimal threshold activation index was more than 2.18. The sensitivity was 80% and the specificity was 83% in the subgroup with anaphylactoid reactions. In the asthma/rhinitis subgroup, the sensitivity was 78% and the specificity was 50%.
Our study demonstrates that there is a significantly higher in vitro basophil response to ASA in intolerant as compared to tolerant subjects. ROC analyses suggest that this measurement might only have a diagnostic value in subjects without asthma and/or rhinitis.
Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.21285515
Particulate allergens potentiate allergic asthma in mice through sustained IgE-mediated mast cell activation.
Jin Cong, Shelburne Christopher P, Li Guojie, Potts Erin N, Riebe Kristina J, Sempowski Gregory D, Foster W Michael, Abraham Soman N
The Journal of clinical investigation
Allergic asthma is characterized by airway hyperresponsiveness, inflammation, and a cellular infiltrate dominated by eosinophils. Numerous epidemiological studies have related the exacerbation of allergic asthma with an increase in ambient inhalable particulate matter from air pollutants. This is because inhalable particles efficiently deliver airborne allergens deep into the airways, where they can aggravate allergic asthma symptoms. However, the cellular mechanisms by which inhalable particulate allergens (pAgs) potentiate asthmatic symptoms remain unknown, in part because most in vivo and in vitro studies exploring the pathogenesis of allergic asthma use soluble allergens (sAgs). Using a mouse model of allergic asthma, we found that, compared with their sAg counterparts, pAgs triggered markedly heightened airway hyperresponsiveness and pulmonary eosinophilia in allergen-sensitized mice. Mast cells (MCs) were implicated in this divergent response, as the differences in airway inflammatory responses provoked by the physical nature of the allergens were attenuated in MC-deficient mice. The pAgs were found to mediate MC-dependent responses by enhancing retention of pAg/IgE/FcεRI complexes within lipid raft–enriched, CD63(+) endocytic compartments, which prolonged IgE/FcεRI-initiated signaling and resulted in heightened cytokine responses. These results reveal how the physical attributes of allergens can co-opt MC endocytic circuitry and signaling responses to aggravate pathological responses of allergic asthma in mice.21271515
Basophil activation test for the diagnosis of hymenoptera venom allergy in childhood: a pilot study.
Ott H, Tenbrock K, Baron J, Merk H, Lehmann S
Klinische Pädiatrie
Cellular in vitro tests such as the CD63-based basophil activation test (BAT) have been successfully used to diagnose hymenoptera venom sensitization in adult patients while this has not been investigated in children so far.
15 children (9 male, 6 female; 12.7±3.5 years) with suspected allergy to vespula (VE) or honey bee (HB) venom entered this study. Besides serum tryptase (ST) levels, sensitisation against VE and HB was assessed by titrated skin testing and determination of venom-specific serum IgE (sIgE) in all patients. After stimulation with 50 ng of insect venom, CD63-expression of activated basophils was measured by flow cytometry.
Skin testing permitted identification of the culprit insect in 7 patients, 3 cases were diagnosed by additional sIgE measurements. In addition, BAT identified mono-sensitization in 3 further patients with double sensitization upon skin and sIgE testing. Test sensitivity was lower for the BAT (67-75%) than for skin testing (89-100%) and sIgE determination (100%). Neither basophil activation nor sIgE serum levels were identified as reliable predictors of sting reaction severity. In all patients, ST measurements yielded values below the upper reference value.
The current pilot study suggests a possible clinical benefit of BAT analysis in the diagnostic workup of pediatric insect venom allergy. However, further large-scale trials are required to investigate whether the BAT reliably contributes to the correct identification of the culprit insect venom. Due to its comparatively low sensitivity, the BAT should currently not be used in isolation from, but only in combination with established diagnostic instruments.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.21270405
CXCR4 expression on activated B cells is downregulated by CD63 and IL-21.
Yoshida Nobuya, Kitayama Daisuke, Arima Masafumi, Sakamoto Akemi, Inamine Ayako, Watanabe-Takano Haruko, Hatano Masahiko, Koike Takao, Tokuhisa Takeshi
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
CXCR4 expression is critical for localization of centroblasts in the dark zone of germinal centers (GCs), and centrocytes downregulate CXCR4 and thus leave the dark zone to reside in the light zone. However, mechanisms governing CXCR4 downregulation on centrocytes are not known. In this study, we show that the amount of intracellular CXCR4 in centroblasts was similar to that in centrocytes, suggesting differential control of CXCR4 protein expression in these GC B cells. Restimulation of activated B cells with IL-21, which is a major cytokine produced by T follicular helper cells, accelerated CXCR4 internalization by inducing endocytosis-related GRK6 expression. Although CXCR4 expression was downregulated on GC B cells by IL-21 stimulation, CXCR4(low) centrocytes developed in the spleens of IL-21R-deficient mice, suggesting other mechanisms for downregulation. The level of CD63 (which recruits CXCR4 to late endosome in CD4 T cells) in centrocytes was more than that in centroblasts and was strikingly elevated in activated Bcl6-deficient B cells. Bcl6, a transcriptional repressor, was detected on the chromatin of the CD63 gene in resting B cells, therefore CD63 is a molecular target of Bcl6. Downregulation of CD63 mRNA in activated Bcl6-deficient B cells by small interfering RNA upregulated CXCR4 expression on the B cells. Furthermore, addition of Bcl6 inhibitor to activated B cell cultures increased CD63 mRNA expression in (and downregulated CXCR4 expression on) those activated B cells. Thus, CXCR4 can be downregulated on activated B cells by IL-21-induced endocytosis and CD63-mediated endosomal recruitment, and these mechanisms may contribute to downregulation of CXCR4 on centrocytes.21248205
Identification of an inhibitory budding signal that blocks the release of HIV particles and exosome/microvesicle proteins.
Gan Xin, Gould Stephen J
Molecular biology of the cell
Animal cells bud exosomes and microvesicles (EMVs) from endosome and plasma membranes. The combination of higher-order oligomerization and plasma membrane binding is a positive budding signal that targets diverse proteins into EMVs and retrovirus particles. Here we describe an inhibitory budding signal (IBS) from the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Gag protein. This IBS was identified in the spacer peptide 2 (SP2) domain of Gag, is activated by C-terminal exposure of SP2, and mediates the severe budding defect of p6-deficient and PTAP-deficient strains of HIV. This IBS also impairs the budding of CD63 and several other viral and nonviral EMV proteins. The IBS does not prevent cargo delivery to the plasma membrane, a major site of EMV and virus budding. However, the IBS does inhibit an interaction between EMV cargo proteins and VPS4B, a component of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery. Taken together, these results demonstrate that inhibitory signals can block protein and virus budding, raise the possibility that the ESCRT machinery plays a role in EMV biogenesis, and shed new light on the role of the p6 domain and PTAP motif in the biogenesis of HIV particles.21245745
Platelet function alterations and their relation to P-selectin (CD62P) expression in children with iron deficiency anemia.
Yıldırım Zuhal K, Orhan Mehmet F, Büyükavcı Mustafa
Blood coagulation & fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
Iron deficiency anemia (IDA) may cause platelet aggregation dysfunction and this can be reversed by iron therapy. On the other hand, it has been reported that the platelet fractions carrying the platelet activation markers, CD62P and CD63, are increased in thalassemic patients and there is a significant correlation between the increased levels of soluble P-selectin and free iron in sickle cell disease. This study was performed to investigate the alterations of platelet functions and whether iron deficiency results in diminished expression of activation marker (P-selectin; CD62P) leading to platelet aggregation dysfunction in children with IDA. Hemoglobin, erythrocyte indices (mean erythrocyte volume and red blood cell distribution width), serum levels of iron, transferrin and ferritin, platelet aggregation tests (with ADP, collagen, and ristocetin), PFA-100 closure time, and CD62P expression were evaluated in fasting blood samples of 22 children with IDA and 20 children without anemia. CD62P expression was detected by flow cytometry in normal and 5 μmol/l ADP-activated platelets. Mean closure times were longer in the patient group than control. In platelet aggregation tests, mean values of maximum aggregation times by ristocetin, ADP, and collagen were also more prolonged in patient group. Ristocetin-induced maximum aggregation rates (amplitude) were significantly higher in patients. However, ADP and collagen induction did not produce the same effect. CD62P expressions were significantly higher on activated platelets of the patient group, although they were similar in both groups before activation by ADP. These findings suggest that platelet aggregation and adhesion have been delayed in children with IDA; however, platelet function abnormalities are not associated with CD62P expression on platelet surface.21241315
Tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 are molecular partners of trimeric FcɛRI on human antigen-presenting cells.
Peng W M, Yu C F, Kolanus W, Mazzocca A, Bieber T, Kraft S, Novak N
Allergy
Most functions of tetraspanins are not related to cell-surface receptor ligand binding, but are mediated by direct interactions with their partner proteins. Functions of trimeric FcɛRI, expressed by antigen-presenting cells (APCs), range from amplification of allergic inflammatory reactions to their active suppression. Cell-type-specific protein-protein interactions might play a role in the regulation of these bidirectional tasks. Therefore, we intended to study the interactions of trimeric FcɛRI with tetraspanins.
The expression levels of tetraspanins CD9, CD37, CD53, CD63, CD81, CD82, and CD151 on skin dendritic cells of atopic dermatitis (AD) patients or healthy individuals were detected by flow cytometry. Tetraspanin expression on FcɛRI(pos) and FcɛRI(neg) monocyte subpopulations was evaluated. Flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, immunoprecipitation, and immunoblotting experiments were performed to observe the relationship between tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 and FcɛRI. Furthermore, plate stimulation experiments were performed, and cytokines in the supernatants were detected.
We found that human FcɛRI(pos) APCs expressed high amounts of tetraspanins and that the tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 were associated with FcɛRI. Concomitant activation of FcɛRI and CD9 on human monocytes increased FcɛRI-mediated cytokine release.
Taken together, we show for the first time that CD9 and CD81 act as molecular partners of trimeric FcɛRI on human APC, which might be of importance in allergic diseases such as AD.
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.21238622
Inhibition of IgE-mediated secretion from human basophils with a highly selective Bruton's tyrosine kinase, Btk, inhibitor.
MacGlashan Donald, Honigberg Lee A, Smith Ashley, Buggy Joseph, Schroeder John T
International immunopharmacology
The study of receptor-mediated signaling in human basophils is often limited by the availability of selective pharmacological agents. The early signaling reaction mediated by FcεRI aggregation is thought to require the activity of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (btk), an enzyme that has been identified as important in B cells signaling because mutations lead to X-linked agammaglobulinemia. This study uses the btk selective irreversible inhibitor, PCI-32765, to explore the role of btk in a variety of functions associated with the activation of human basophils. Nine endpoints of basophil activation were examined: induced cell surface expression of CD63, CD203c, CD11b; induced secretion of histamine, LTC4, IL-4 and IL-13; the cytosolic calcium response; and the induced loss of syk kinase. Four stimuli were examined; anti-IgE antibody, formyl-met-leu-phe (FMLP), C5a and IL-3. For stimulation with anti-IgE, PCI-32765 inhibited CD63, histamine, LTC4 and IL-4 secretion with an IC50 of 3-6 nM (with 100% inhibition at 50 nM) and it inhibited CD203c and CD11b and the cytosolic calcium response with and IC50 of 30-40 nM. Fifty percent occupancy of btk with PCI-32765 occurred at ~10nM. Consistent with btk functioning downstream or in parallel to syk activation, PCI-32765 did not inhibit the loss of syk induced by anti-IgE in overnight cultures. Finally, PCI-32765 did not significantly inhibit basophil activation by FMLP or C5a and did not inhibit IL-13 release induced by IL-3. These results suggest that btk is specifically required for IgE-mediated activation of human basophils.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.21235781
Human saliva, plasma and breast milk exosomes contain RNA: uptake by macrophages.
Lässer Cecilia, Alikhani Vesta Seyed, Ekström Karin, Eldh Maria, Paredes Patricia Torregrosa, Bossios Apostolos, Sjöstrand Margareta, Gabrielsson Susanne, Lötvall Jan, Valadi Hadi
Journal of translational medicine
Exosomes are 30-100 nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin produced by numerous cells. They can mediate diverse biological functions, including antigen presentation. Exosomes have recently been shown to contain functional RNA, which can be delivered to other cells. Exosomes may thus mediate biological functions either by surface-to-surface interactions with cells, or by the delivery of functional RNA to cells. Our aim was therefore to determine the presence of RNA in exosomes from human saliva, plasma and breast milk and whether these exosomes can be taken up by macrophages.
Exosomes were purified from human saliva, plasma and breast milk using ultracentrifugation and filtration steps. Exosomes were detected by electron microscopy and examined by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry was performed by capturing the exosomes on anti-MHC class II coated beads, and further stain with anti-CD9, anti-CD63 or anti-CD81. Breast milk exosomes were further analysed for the presence of Hsc70, CD81 and calnexin by Western blot. Total RNA was detected with a Bioanalyzer and mRNA was identified by the synthesis of cDNA using an oligo (dT) primer and analysed with a Bioanalyzer. The uptake of PKH67-labelled saliva and breast milk exosomes by macrophages was examined by measuring fluorescence using flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy.
RNA was detected in exosomes from all three body fluids. A portion of the detected RNA in plasma exosomes was characterised as mRNA. Our result extends the characterisation of exosomes in healthy humans and confirms the presence of RNA in human saliva and plasma exosomes and reports for the first time the presence of RNA in breast milk exosomes. Our results also show that the saliva and breast milk exosomes can be taken up by human macrophages.
Exosomes in saliva, plasma and breast milk all contain RNA, confirming previous findings that exosomes from several sources contain RNA. Furthermore, exosomes are readily taken up by macrophages, supporting the notion that exosomal RNA can be shuttled between cells.21231854
Clearance of platelet microparticles in vivo.
Rank A, Nieuwland R, Crispin A, Grützner S, Iberer M, Toth B, Pihusch R
Platelets
At present, little is known about the clearance of platelet-derived microparticles (PMP) in human blood, as due to ethical considerations infusion experiments with labeled microparticles are delicate. Therefore, we investigated the kinetics of PMP, which are abundantly present in apheresis platelet concentrates (PC), following platelet transfusion in severe thrombocytopenic patients (n=11). PMP were double-stained with annexin V and cell-specific antibodies (anti-CD61, anti-CD63 or anti-CD62P, respectively) and detected by flow cytometry before and after transfusion of a single PC at fixed time intervals. Upon transfusion, the plasma levels of MP binding annexin V (2.5-fold), PMP (CD61+; 2.9-fold), and PMP from activated platelets (CD63+; 1.9-fold) or P-selectin (2.5-fold) increased immediately. The plasma levels of MP decreased with a half life of 5.8 hours (annexin V; 95% CI: 1.8?18.3) and 5.3 hours (CD61; 95% CI: 2.0?14.2). This is the first report in which the half life time of transfused PMP has been investigated in humans.21217927
In vitro Biphasic Effect of Honey Bee Venom on Basophils from Screened Healthy Blood Donors.
Chirumbolo Salvatore, Zanoni Giovanna, Ortolani Riccardo, Vella Antonio
Allergy, asthma & immunology research
Apis mellifera L. bee venom is the most studied hymenoptera allergen, but many aspects of its action on human basophils remain unclear. Allergologists seek evidence of the effectiveness of bee venom immunotherapy as this approach is the chosen treatment for systemic allergic reactions. The effect of bee venom on human basophils in vitro has not been studied in detail for many reasons, including the paucity of basophils in peripheral blood, inter-individual basophil response variability, and the reliability and predictability of basophil activation tests. We conducted a brief preliminary survey of the effect of Apis bee venom on healthy asymptomatic (non-allergic) subjects. A dose of an aqueous commercial extract of Apis bee venom as high as 10 µg/mL activated resting basophils (CD63=+80-90%, CD203c=+30%), while it inhibited the expression of CD63 (-50%) following basophil stimulation by the soluble agonists formyl-Met-Leu-Phe or anti-IgE. The activation of resting basophils appeared to be dose-related. Only when basophils were activated with an IgE-mediated agonist, did bee venom extract exhibit a possible priming mechanism at the lowest doses used only via CD63, while it was ineffective via CD203c. Autocrine interleukin-3 may play a role in the observed biphasic behavior.21172122
RNA-containing exosomes in human nasal secretions.
Lässer Cecilia, O'Neil Serena E, Ekerljung Linda, Ekström Karin, Sjöstrand Margareta, Lötvall Jan
American journal of rhinology & allergy
Exosomes are nanovesicles of endocytic origin released by cells and present in human body fluids such as plasma, breast milk, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. These vesicles take part in communication between cells. Recently, it was shown that exosomes contain both mRNA and microRNA. This RNA can be shuttled between cells (exosomal shuttle RNA), which is a new route of communication between cells. The aim of this study was to determine whether nasal secretions harbor exosomes and furthermore, whether these exosomes contain RNA.
Human nasal lavage fluid (NLF) underwent centrifugation and filtration to discard cells and debris, followed by a final ultracentrifugation at 120,000 × g to pellet the exosomes. Exosomes were detected using electron microscopy (EM), flow cytometry, and Western blot. RNA was extracted and analyzed using a Bioanalyzer.
Exosomes were visualized as 40-80 nm, CD63(+) vesicles using EM. Flow cytometry of exosomes using anti-major histocompatibility complex class II beads revealed exosomes positive for the tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD81. Western blot confirmed the presence of exosomal protein and absence of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), because the exosomes were positive for Tsg101, but negative for the ER marker, calnexin. Bioanalyzer analysis revealed that, these exosomes contain RNA.
This study shows for the first time that NLF contains exosomes and that these exosomes contain RNA. Further characterization of the exosomal RNA and proteins may provide important information about communication in the nose and potentially provide a source of biomarkers for upper airway diseases.21149584
The tetraspanin CD82 is specifically recruited to fungal and bacterial phagosomes prior to acidification.
Artavanis-Tsakonas Katerina, Kasperkovitz Pia V, Papa Eliseo, Cardenas Michael L, Khan Nida S, Van der Veen Annemarthe G, Ploegh Hidde L, Vyas Jatin M
Infection and immunity
CD82 is a member of the tetraspanin superfamily, whose physiological role is best described in the context of cancer metastasis. However, CD82 also associates with components of the class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigen presentation pathway, including class II MHC molecules and the peptide-loading machinery, as well as CD63, another tetraspanin, suggesting a role for CD82 in antigen presentation. Here, we observe the dynamic rearrangement of CD82 after pathogen uptake by imaging CD82-mRFP1 expressed in primary living dendritic cells. CD82 showed rapid and specific recruitment to Cryptococcus neoformans-containing phagosomes compared to polystyrene-containing phagosomes, similar to CD63. CD82 was also actively recruited to phagosomes containing other pathogenic fungi, including Candida albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus. Recruitment of CD82 to fungal phagosomes occurred independently of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling. Recruitment was not limited to fungi, as bacterial organisms, including Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, also induced CD82 recruitment to the phagosome. CD82 intersected the endocytic pathway used by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), implicating CD82 in trafficking of small, pathogen-associated molecules. Despite its partial overlap with lysosomal compartments, CD82 recruitment to C. neoformans-containing phagosomes occurred independently of phagosome acidification. Kinetic analysis of fluorescence imaging revealed that CD82 and class II MHC simultaneously appear in the phagosome, indicating that the two proteins may be associated. Together, these data show that the CD82 tetraspanin is specifically recruited to pathogen-containing phagosomes prior to fusion with lysosomes.21149578
Ameloblastin regulates osteogenic differentiation by inhibiting Src kinase via cross talk between integrin beta1 and CD63.
Iizuka Shinji, Kudo Yasusei, Yoshida Maki, Tsunematsu Takaaki, Yoshiko Yuji, Uchida Takashi, Ogawa Ikuko, Miyauchi Mutsumi, Takata Takashi
Molecular and cellular biology
Ameloblastin, the most abundant nonamelogenin enamel matrix protein, plays a role in ameloblast differentiation. Here, we found that ameloblastin was expressed in osteosarcoma cells; to explore the potential functions of ameloblastin in osteoblasts, we investigated whether this protein is involved in osteogenic differentiation and bone formation on the premise that CD63, a member of the transmembrane-4 glycoprotein superfamily, interacts with integrins in the presence of ameloblastin. Ameloblastin bound to CD63 and promoted CD63 binding to integrin β1. The interaction between CD63 and integrin β1 induced Src kinase inactivation via the binding of CD63 to Src. The reduction of Src activity and osteogenic differentiation mediated by ameloblastin were abrogated by treatment with anti-CD63 antibody and overexpression of constitutively active Src, respectively. Therefore, our results suggest that ameloblastin is expressed in osteoblasts and functions as a promoting factor for osteogenic differentiation via a novel pathway through the interaction between CD63 and integrin β1.21142445
Membrane vesicles released by intestinal epithelial cells infected with rotavirus inhibit T-cell function.
Barreto Alfonso, Rodríguez Luz-Stella, Rojas Olga Lucía, Wolf Marie, Greenberg Harry B, Franco Manuel A, Angel Juana
Viral immunology
Rotavirus (RV) predominantly replicates in intestinal epithelial cells (IEC), and "danger signals" released by these cells may modulate viral immunity. We have recently shown that human model IEC (Caco-2 cells) infected with rhesus-RV release a non-inflammatory group of immunomodulators that includes heat shock proteins (HSPs) and TGF-β1. Here we show that both proteins are released in part in association with membrane vesicles (MV) obtained from filtrated Caco-2 supernatants concentrated by ultracentrifugation. These MV express markers of exosomes (CD63 and others), but not of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or nuclei. Larger quantities of proteins associated with MV were released by RV-infected cells than by non-infected cells. VP6 co-immunoprecipitated with CD63 present in these MV, and VP6 co-localized with CD63 in RV-infected cells, suggesting that this viral protein is associated with the MV, and that this association occurs intracellularly. CD63 present in MV preparations from stool samples from 36 children with gastroenteritis due or not due to RV were analyzed. VP6 co-immunoprecipitated with CD63 in 3/8 stool samples from RV-infected children, suggesting that these MV are released by RV-infected cells in vivo. Moreover, fractions that contained MV from RV-infected cells induced death and inhibited proliferation of CD4(+) T cells to a greater extent than fractions from non-infected cells. These effects were in part due to TGF-β, because they were reversed by treatment of the T cells with the TGF-β-receptor inhibitor ALK5i. MV from RV-infected and non-infected cells were heterogeneous, with morphologies and typical flotation densities described for exosomes (between 1.10 and 1.18 g/mL), and denser vesicles (>1.24 g/mL). Both types of MV from RV-infected cells were more efficient at inhibiting T-cell function than were those from non-infected cells. We propose that RV infection of IEC releases MV that modulate viral immunity.21137111
Multiple desmoplastic cellular neurothekeomas localized to the face of a 16-year-old boy.
García-Gutiérrez Monica, Toussaint-Caire Sonia, González-Sánchez Pablo, Ortiz-Hidalgo Carlos
The American Journal of dermatopathology
Cellular neurothekeomas are relative uncommon benign dermal tumors of uncertain histogenesis. Most commonly they arise as a solitary papule or nodule on the head and neck or upper trunk of young adults with a slight female predominance. There has been only 1 previous report of multiple neurothekeomas. The patient described herein was a 16-year-old otherwise healthy boy who presented with approximately 30 facial papules that arose over the course of 6 months and progressively enlarged. Histologically, all lesions were composed of spindled to epithelioid cells, but varied in the degree of cellularity and dermal sclerosis. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the cells of interest expressed S100A6, vimentin, CD63 (NKI/C3), PGP 9.5, and factor XIIIa and were negative for CD68, glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), S-100, HMB-45, epithelial membrane antigen, actin, and CD57 consistent with a diagnosis of multiple desmoplastic cellular neurothekeomas.21122351
[A proliminary study on the regulatory function of human plasma exosomes-like vesicles.]
Ma Yue-E, Ren Ya-Na, Yang Jie, Li Dan, Guo Chen-Zhi, Guo Juan, Ni Bing, Fan Hua-Hua
Zhonghua xue ye xue za zhi = Zhonghua xueyexue zazhi
OBJECTIVE: To identify the exosomes-like vesicles from the plasma and study their biologic characteristics and regulatory effect. METHODS: The exosomes-like vesicles were purified from healthy donors plasma with a series of high-speed centrifugations and ultrafiltration. Morphology was identified by transmission electron microscopy and biologic characteristics by Western blot and flow cytometry. CD4(+)T cells and CD4(+)CD25(+)CD127low Treg cells were purified from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by Magnetic cell sorting. After exosomes-like vesicles cultured with CD4(+)T cells or CD4(+)CD25(+)CD127low Treg cells, cell proliferation and apoptosis were assayed. Phosphorylated β-catenin level in Wnt signaling by phosflow. RESULTS: Exosomes-like vesicles from plasma were similar to previously described exosomes in shapes and size and expressed exosome marker proteins CD63 and CD81 as well as the MHC-II molecule, costimulatory molecules CD86 etc. After co-cultured with CD4(+) T cells, exosomes-like vesicles inhibited the proliferation of the T cells in a dose-dependent manner. After Treg cells cultured with exosomes-like vesicles for 14 days, the survival rate of the Treg cells was 57.07%, while that of the control Treg was 30.91%. Frizzled receptors 2, 3, 4and LRP6 gene mRNA expressed (the relative gray value was 48.50, 34.84, 23.85, 49.73) in the Treg cells by RT-PCR, and Wnt molecular expressed in exosomes-like vesicles. After Treg cells co-cultured with exosomes-like vesicles, the MFI of phosphorylated β-catenin decreased (from 20.06 ± 2.99 to 12.41 ± 2.08), and the expression of Bcl-2 mRNA was upregulated significantly (the relative gray value from 0.45 to 84.97). CONCLUSIONS: Exosomes-like vesicles existed in human plasma and express immune regulatory molecules. They can suppress the proliferation of activated CD4(+) T cells induce their apoptosis and pro-long the survival of natural Treg cells via Wnt signaling pathway.21118353
Reduced platelet function and role of drugs in acute gastrointestinal bleeding.
Kringen Marianne K, Narum Sigrid, Lygren Idar, Seljeflot Ingebjørg, Sandset Per-Morten, Trøseid Anne-Marie S, Johansen Per W, Brørs Odd, Holthe Mette R
Basic & clinical pharmacology & toxicology
Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding may be caused by a constitutive bleeding disposition or drug-induced inhibition of hemostasis. Platelet function in patients with ongoing GI bleeding is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate platelet function in patients with acute GI bleeding. Patients (n=35) presenting with acute GI bleeding (hematemesis or melena) were recruited. For comparison, 13 patients treated with aspirin and 11 patients treated with clopidogrel without GI bleeding and 27 healthy controls were studied. Platelet function was measured by whole-blood aggregation and flow cytometry. Coagulation function was measured with calibrated automated thrombography. Platelet aggregation and P-selectin expression were significantly lower after arachidonic acid stimulation in GI bleeding patients than in healthy subjects (p≤0.05). Collagen-induced P-selectin expression was significantly reduced in patients using anti-platelet drugs (p=0.02) and in many patients not using anti-platelet drugs. Thrombin generation, measured by calibrated automated thrombography, was only reduced in patients on warfarin treatment. In conclusion, platelet function is reduced in acute GI bleeding patients and a considerable proportion appears to be related to drug use.
© 2010 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology © 2010 Nordic Pharmacological Society.21118100
Lysosomal membrane proteins: life between acid and neutral conditions.
Saftig Paul, Schröder Bernd, Blanz Judith
Biochemical Society transactions
Whereas we have a profound understanding about the function and biogenesis of the protein constituents in the lumen of the lysosomal compartment, much less is known about the functions of proteins of the lysosomal membrane. Proteomic analyses of the lysosomal membrane suggest that, apart from the well-known lysosomal membrane proteins, additional and less abundant membrane proteins are present. The identification of disease-causing genes and the in-depth analysis of knockout mice leading to mutated or absent membrane proteins of the lysosomal membrane have demonstrated the essential role of these proteins in lysosomal acidification, transport of metabolites resulting from hydrolytic degradation and interaction and fusion with other cellular membrane systems. In addition, trafficking pathways of lysosomal membrane proteins are closely linked to the biogenesis of this compartment. This is exemplified by the recent finding that LIMP-2 (lysosomal integral membrane protein type-2) is responsible for the mannose 6-phosphate receptor-independent delivery of newly synthesized β-glucocerebrosidase to the lysosome. Similar to LIMP-2, which could also be linked to vesicular transport processes in certain polarized cell types, the major constituents of the lysosomal membrane, the glycoproteins LAMP (lysosome-associated membrane protein)-1 and LAMP-2 are essential for regulation of lysosomal motility and participating in control of membrane fusion events between autophagosomes or phagosomes with late endosomes/lysosomes. Our recent investigations into the role of these proteins have not only increased our understanding of the endolysosomal system, but also supported their major role in cell physiology and the development of different diseases.21112036
Phenotypic heterogeneity, novel diagnostic markers, and target expression profiles in normal and neoplastic human mast cells.
Valent Peter, Cerny-Reiterer Sabine, Herrmann Harald, Mirkina Irina, George Tracy I, Sotlar Karl, Sperr Wolfgang R, Horny Hans-Peter
Best practice & research. Clinical haematology
Mast cells (MC) are specialized immune cells that play a key role in anaphylactic reactions. Growth, differentiation, and function of these cells are regulated by a complex network of cytokines, surface receptors, signaling molecules, the microenvironment, and the genetic background. A number of previous and more recent data suggest that MC are heterogeneous in terms of cytokine-regulation, expression of cytoplasmic and cell surface antigens, and response to ligands. MC heterogeneity is often organ-specific and is considered to be related to MC plasticity, disease-associated factors, and the maturation stage of the cells. The stem cell factor (SCF) receptor KIT (CD117) is expressed on all types of MC independent of maturation and activation-status. In systemic mastocytosis (SM), KIT is often expressed in MC in a mutated and constitutively activated form. In these patients, MC aberrantly display CD2 and CD25, diagnostic markers of neoplastic MC in all SM variants. In advanced SM, MC co-express substantial amounts of CD30, whereas CD2 expression on MC may be decreased compared to indolent SM. Other surface molecules, such as CD63 or CD203c, are overexpressed on neoplastic MC in SM, and are further upregulated upon cross-linking of the IgE receptor. Some of the cell surface antigens expressed on MC or their progenitors may serve as therapeutic targets in the future. These targets include CD25, CD30, CD33, CD44, and CD117/KIT. The current article provides an overview on cell surface antigens and target receptors expressed by MC in physiologic and reactive tissues, and in patients with SM, with special reference to phenotypic heterogeneity and clinical implications.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.21109752
Immediate-type hypersensitivity to succinylated corticosteroids.
Walker Annett Isabel, Räwer Helen-Caroline, Sieber Wolfgang, Przybilla Bernhard
International archives of allergy and immunology
Despite their frequent use, systemic corticosteroids have rarely elicited immediate-type reactions.
We report two male patients, aged 26 and 70 years, respectively, with severe immediate-type hypersensitivity secondary to the administration of corticosteroids esterified with succinate.
Skin tests, basophil activation tests and challenge tests were performed for diagnostic evaluation.
In both patients, immediate-type skin test reactions were found to methylprednisolone sodium hemisuccinate (MSH) and prednisolone sodium hemisuccinate (PSH). In contrast, nonsuccinylated corticosteroids (including methylprednisolone and prednisolone in one patient) yielded no test reactions. Basophils from one patient exhibited a stimulated expression of the activation marker CD63 upon in vitro incubation with PSH or hydrocortisone sodium succinate, but not with hydrocortisone. Skin tests and basophil activation tests were negative in controls. One patient was challenged with the incriminated drugs. He developed flush, conjunctivitis, tachycardia and dyspnea 2 min after injection of MSH, and dyspnea shortly after intravenous administration of PSH. Oral and intravenous challenge tests with nonsuccinylated corticosteroids were tolerated well by both patients.
These case reports should alert clinicians to rare, but severe immediate-type reactions to corticosteroids, related to the succinate moiety in our patients. In case of allergic reactions to corticosteroids, it is mandatory to identify the causative agent and find safe alternatives.
Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.21087653
Differential survival of AML subpopulations in NOD/SCID mice.
Schubert Mario, Herbert Nicolás, Taubert Isabel, Ran Dan, Singh Rahul, Eckstein Volker, Vitacolonna Mario, Ho Anthony D, Zöller Margot
Experimental hematology
Leukemia-initiating cells can retrospectively be defined by tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mice and be characterized by surface markers. The latter still being discussed for acute myeloid leukemia (AML), nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice were used to evaluate long-time reconstitution and expansion of AML subpopulations.
Bone marrow cells from patients with AML were separated according to CD34 expression, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity, and divisional kinetics in comparison to cord blood-derived CD34(+) hematopoietic stem cells, evaluating survival and expansion in NOD/SCID mice. The AML long-term surviving capacity of subpopulations recovered from NOD/SCID mice was confirmed by ex vivo survival.
AML mononuclear cells were detected in bone marrow and spleen of NOD/SCID mice 12 weeks after transplantation. The majority of recovered cells were CD34(+) and significantly more CD34(+) cells were recovered after application of ALDH(bright) (high ALDH activity), CD34(+), or slowly dividing (PKH(bright)) than after ALDH(dim), CD34(-), or fast dividing (PKH(dim)) cell application. CD123(+), CD63(+), and CD44v7(+) cells were also more abundant after the transfer of ALDH(bright) or CD34(+) AML mononuclear cells. In the spleen, large AML cell clusters were only recovered after ALDH(bright), CD34(+), or PKH(bright) cell transfer. Importantly, in secondary long-term in vitro cultures, quite exclusively CD34(+) AML mononuclear cells survived and expanded.
Separation of ALDH(bright), CD34(+), or PKH(bright) cells enriches for AML long-term surviving capacity, which reside in the CD34(+) subpopulation, as rather exclusively CD34(+) cells survived and expanded in vivo and ex vivo. Long-term survival capacity may be supported by CD44v7 expression.
Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.21044087
Exosomal-like vesicles with immune-modulatory features are present in human plasma and can induce CD4+ T-cell apoptosis in vitro.
Ren Yana, Yang Jie, Xie Rufeng, Gao Li, Yang Yiming, Fan Huahua, Qian Kaicheng
Transfusion
Exosomes are small membrane vesicles that are secreted from many cell types into various body fluids. These vesicles are thought to play a role in cell-cell interactions.
Vesicles were isolated from human plasma of healthy donors by differential ultracentrifugation and ultrafiltration. The vesicles were identified by transmission electron microscopy, and their biochemical characteristics were analyzed by Western blot and flow cytometry. The immune-modulatory ability of exosomal-like vesicles was examined by incubating them with CD4+ T cells for CD4+ T-cell proliferation and apoptosis assays in vitro.
Vesicles purified from human plasma displayed shapes and sizes similar to those of previously described exosomes and contained exosomes marker proteins CD63 and CD81. They also expressed molecules such as MHC Class II molecules, CD80, CD86, and the cell signal transduction molecules Wnt3a, Wnt5a, and FasL. Furthermore, functional analysis showed that allogeneic plasma exosomes restrained the survival of CD4+ T cells. Plasma exosomes can induce dose-dependent suppression of proliferation of activated CD4+ T cells, with the strongest responses induced by 500 µg/mL exosomes in vitro. Antibodies against exosomes FasL can block the activity of exosomes on CD4+ T-cell apoptosis. Moreover, three different concentrations of CD4+ T cells were inhibited by plasma exosomes and the suppressive function was not dependent on interleukin-2.
Exosomes present in human plasma contain immunity-associated molecules and can induce CD4+ T-cell apoptosis in vitro. Plasma exosomes have the capacity to influence immune responses.
© 2010 American Association of Blood Banks.21041449
Palmitoylation-dependent association with CD63 targets the Ca2+ sensor synaptotagmin VII to lysosomes.
Flannery Andrew R, Czibener Cecilia, Andrews Norma W
The Journal of cell biology
Syt VII is a Ca(2+) sensor that regulates lysosome exocytosis and plasma membrane repair. Because it lacks motifs that mediate lysosomal targeting, it is unclear how Syt VII traffics to these organelles. In this paper, we show that mutations or inhibitors that abolish palmitoylation disrupt Syt VII targeting to lysosomes, causing its retention in the Golgi complex. In macrophages, Syt VII is translocated simultaneously with the lysosomal tetraspanin CD63 from tubular lysosomes to nascent phagosomes in a Ca(2+)-dependent process that facilitates particle uptake. Mutations in Syt VII palmitoylation sites block trafficking of Syt VII, but not CD63, to lysosomes and phagosomes, whereas tyrosine replacement in the lysosomal targeting motif of CD63 causes both proteins to accumulate on the plasma membrane. Complexes of CD63 and Syt VII are detected only when Syt VII palmitoylation sites are intact. These findings identify palmitoylation-dependent association with the tetraspanin CD63 as the mechanism by which Syt VII is targeted to lysosomes.20975283
Basophil CD203c levels are increased at baseline and can be used to monitor omalizumab treatment in subjects with nut allergy.
Gernez Yael, Tirouvanziam Rabindra, Yu Grace, Ghosn Eliver E B, Reshamwala Neha, Nguyen Tammie, Tsai Mindy, Galli Stephen J, Herzenberg Leonard A, Herzenberg Leonore A, Nadeau Kari C
International archives of allergy and immunology
Basophils contribute to anaphylaxis and allergies. We examined the utility of assessing basophil-associated surface antigens (CD11b/CD63/CD123/CD203c/CD294) in characterizing and monitoring subjects with nut allergy.
We used flow cytometry to analyze basophils at baseline (without any activation) and after ex vivo stimulation of whole blood by addition of nut or other allergens for 2, 10, and 30 min. We also evaluated whether basophil expression of CD11b/CD63/CD123/CD203c/CD294 was altered in subjects treated with anti-IgE monoclonal antibody (omalizumab) to reduce plasma levels of IgE.
We demonstrate that basophil CD203c levels are increased at baseline in subjects with nut allergy compared to healthy controls (13 subjects in each group, p < 0.0001). Furthermore, we confirm that significantly increased expression of CD203c occurs on subject basophils when stimulated with the allergen to which the subject is sensitive and can be detected rapidly (10 min of stimulation, n = 11, p < 0.0008). In 5 subjects with severe peanut allergy, basophil CD203c expression following stimulation with peanut allergen was significantly decreased (p < 0.05) after 4 and 8 weeks of omalizumab treatment but returned toward pretreatment levels after treatment cessation.
Subjects with nut allergy show an increase of basophil CD203c levels at baseline and following rapid ex vivo stimulation with nut allergen. Both can be reduced by omalizumab therapy. These results highlight the potential of using basophil CD203c levels for baseline diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring in subjects with nut allergy.
Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.20970101
Sceptical views on homeopathy: Do we really need "sceptical" homeopaths?
Mastrangelo Domenico
Homeopathy : the journal of the Faculty of Homeopathy
20955404
Thrombocytopenia in early malaria is associated with GP1b shedding in absence of systemic platelet activation and consumptive coagulopathy.
de Mast Quirijn, de Groot Philip G, van Heerde Waander L, Roestenberg Meta, van Velzen Jeroen F, Verbruggen Bert, Roest Mark, McCall Matthew, Nieman An-Emmie, Westendorp Josien, Syafruddin Din, Fijnheer Rob, van Dongen-Lases Edmee C, Sauerwein Robert W, van der Ven Andre J
British journal of haematology
Thrombocytopenia develops early in malaria, but the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. We studied the aetiology of malaria-associated thrombocytopenia in volunteers experimentally infected with Plasmodium falciparum malaria, in Indonesian malaria patients and in ex vivo studies. In experimental human malaria, the decrease in platelet counts was associated with a concurrent rise in young platelets (immature platelet fraction) and thrombopoietin. D-dimer concentrations were moderately elevated without a prolongation in the activated partial thromboplastin time or decrease in fibrinogen. There was no increase in expression of the platelet surface markers CD62P, PAC-1 and CD63 and in plasma concentrations of the platelet factors P-selectin, CXCR4, CXCL7, RANTES and CD40L. In contrast, concentrations of soluble glycoprotein-1b (sGP1b), the external domain of the platelet receptor for von Willebrand factor (VWF), increased early. Indonesian malaria patients also had elevated concentrations of sGP1b, which correlated with VWF concentrations. Finally, incubation of platelets with parasitized erythrocytes in vitro failed to induce platelet aggregation or activation. We concluded that neither compromised platelet production nor platelet activation or consumptive coagulopathy were responsible for the early thrombocytopenia in malaria. We hypothesize that the increase in sGP1b concentrations results from VWF-mediated GP1b shedding; a process that may prevent excessive adhesion of platelets and parasitized erythrocytes.
© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.20949024
αB crystallin is apically secreted within exosomes by polarized human retinal pigment epithelium and provides neuroprotection to adjacent cells.
Sreekumar Parameswaran G, Kannan Ram, Kitamura Mizuki, Spee Christine, Barron Ernesto, Ryan Stephen J, Hinton David R
PloS one
αB crystallin is a chaperone protein with anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory functions and has been identified as a biomarker in age-related macular degeneration. The purpose of this study was to determine whether αB crystallin is secreted from retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, the mechanism of this secretory pathway and to determine whether extracellular αB crystallin can be taken up by adjacent retinal cells and provide protection from oxidant stress. We used human RPE cells to establish that αB crystallin is secreted by a non-classical pathway that involves exosomes. Evidence for the release of exosomes by RPE and localization of αB crystallin within the exosomes was achieved by immunoblot, immunofluorescence, and electron microscopic analyses. Inhibition of lipid rafts or exosomes significantly reduced αB crystallin secretion, while inhibitors of classic secretory pathways had no effect. In highly polarized RPE monolayers, αB crystallin was selectively secreted towards the apical, photoreceptor-facing side. In support, confocal microscopy established that αB crystallin was localized predominantly in the apical compartment of RPE monolayers, where it co-localized in part with exosomal marker CD63. Severe oxidative stress resulted in barrier breakdown and release of αB crystallin to the basolateral side. In normal mouse retinal sections, αB crystallin was identified in the interphotoreceptor matrix. An increased uptake of exogenous αB crystallin and protection from apoptosis by inhibition of caspase 3 and PARP activation were observed in stressed RPE cultures. αB Crystallin was taken up by photoreceptors in mouse retinal explants exposed to oxidative stress. These results demonstrate an important role for αB crystallin in maintaining and facilitating a neuroprotective outer retinal environment and may also explain the accumulation of αB crystallin in extracellular sub-RPE deposits in the stressed microenvironment in age-related macular degeneration. Thus evidence from our studies supports a neuroprotective role for αB crystallin in ocular diseases.20929955
Evidence for a non-replicative intracellular stage of nontypable Haemophilus influenzae in epithelial cells.
Morey Pau, Cano Victoria, Martí-Lliteras Pau, López-Gómez Antonio, Regueiro Verónica, Saus Carles, Bengoechea José Antonio, Garmendia Junkal
Microbiology (Reading, England)
Nontypable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) is a Gram-negative, non-capsulated human bacterial pathogen, a major cause of a repertoire of respiratory infections, and intimately associated with persistent lung bacterial colonization in patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite its medical relevance, relatively little is known about its mechanisms of pathogenicity. In this study, we found that NTHi invades the airway epithelium by a distinct mechanism, requiring microtubule assembly, lipid rafts integrity, and activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signalling. We found that the majority of intracellular bacteria are located inside an acidic subcellular compartment, in a metabolically active and non-proliferative state. This NTHi-containing vacuole (NTHi-CV) is endowed with late endosome features, co-localizing with LysoTracker, lamp-1, lamp-2, CD63 and Rab7. The NTHi-CV does not acquire Golgi- or autophagy-related markers. These observations were extended to immortalized and primary human airway epithelial cells. By using NTHi clinical isolates expressing different amounts of phosphocholine (PCho), a major modification of NTHi lipooligosaccharide, on their surfaces, and an isogenic lic1BC mutant strain lacking PCho, we showed that PCho is not responsible for NTHi intracellular location. In sum, this study indicates that NTHi can survive inside airway epithelial cells.20880880
Proinflammatory exosomes in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of patients with sarcoidosis.
Qazi Khaleda R, Torregrosa Paredes Patricia, Dahlberg Benita, Grunewald Johan, Eklund Anders, Gabrielsson Susanne
Thorax
Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown aetiology characterised by granuloma formation and the presence of interferon γ (IFNγ)-producing T cells that cause inflammation and tissue damage in multiple organs, especially the lung. Exosomes are nano-sized immunomodulatory vesicles of endosomal origin released from a diverse range of cells and are also found in physiological fluids including bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from healthy individuals.
To investigate whether exosomes are enriched in the lungs of patients with sarcoidosis compared with healthy individuals and whether they could contribute to pathogenesis.
BALF exosomes from patients with sarcoidosis (n=36) and healthy controls (n=14) were compared by electron microscopy, flow cytometry, western blot analysis and mass spectrometry. BALF exosomes were incubated with autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or the human bronchial epithelial cell line 16HBE14o-. Cytokines were measured by ELISPOT and ELISA.
BALF from patients with sarcoidosis showed increased levels of exosomes compared with healthy individuals. Exosomes from patients showed significantly higher expression of MHC class I and II, tetraspanins CD9, CD63 and CD81 as well as neuregulin-1, known to be associated with cancer progression. Furthermore, BALF exosomes from patients induced significantly higher IFNγ and interleukin (IL)-13 production in autologous PBMCs compared with healthy individuals and could also stimulate IL-8 production from epithelial cells.
The results indicate for the first time a role for exosomes in human lung disease with possible contributions to the initiation and progression of inflammation in sarcoidosis. This suggests that exosomes may be a new potential target for the clinical treatment of lung diseases.20878381
[Cellular in-vitro assays. Applicability in daily routine].
Wedi B, Kapp A
Der Hautarzt; Zeitschrift für Dermatologie, Venerologie, und verwandte Gebiete
Cellular in-vitro assays are able to detect antigen-dependent cellular processes without any risk for the patient. After antigen stimulation, both the cellular antigen stimulation test assessing sulfidoleukotriene production in leukocyte suspension, and flow cytometric basophil activation assays determining surface activation markers (CD63, CD203c), represent accepted models for in-vivo mast cell stimulation particularly in IgE-dependent reactions of immediate type. The value of these assays should be estimated considering the type of antigen and further diagnostic options. Most studies can not be compared due to different allergen concentrations, conditions of stimulation, methods, and defined cut-offs. Therefore, it is difficult to evaluate published evidence. Because of the logistic effort, cellular assays are often available only in specialized laboratories. However, in daily routine they are important in cases with clear-cut history but negative conventional allergy diagnostic procedures, in case of rare allergens (drugs, exotic food), as well as contraindications for skin and/or provocation test (hymenoptera venom allergy, anaphylaxis).20849592
Bimodal action of the flavonoid quercetin on basophil function: an investigation of the putative biochemical targets.
Chirumbolo Salvatore, Marzotto Marta, Conforti Anita, Vella Antonio, Ortolani Riccardo, Bellavite Paolo
Clinical and molecular allergy : CMA
Flavonoids, a large group of polyphenolic metabolites derived from plants have received a great deal of attention over the last several decades for their properties in inflammation and allergy. Quercetin, the most abundant of plant flavonoids, exerts a modulatory action at nanomolar concentrations on human basophils. As this mechanism needs to be elucidated, in this study we focused the possible signal transduction pathways which may be affected by this compound. Methods: K2-EDTA derived leukocyte buffy coats enriched in basophil granulocytes were treated with different concentrations of quercetin and triggered with anti-IgE, fMLP, the calcium ionophore A23187 and the phorbol ester PMA in different experimental conditions. Basophils were captured in a flow cytometry analysis as CD123bright/HLADRnon expressing cells and fluorescence values of the activation markers CD63-FITC or CD203c-PE were used to produce dose response curves. The same population was assayed for histamine release.
Quercetin inhibited the expression of CD63 and CD203c and the histamine release in basophils activated with anti-IgE or with the ionophore: the IC50 in the anti-IgE model was higher than in the ionophore model and the effects were more pronounced for CD63 than for CD203c. Nanomolar concentrations of quercetin were able to prime both markers expression and histamine release in the fMLP activation model while no effect of quercetin was observed when basophils were activated with PMA. The specific phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) inhibitor wortmannin exhibited the same behavior of quercetin in anti-IgE and fMLP activation, thus suggesting a role for PI3K involvement in the priming mechanism.
These results rule out a possible role of protein kinase C in the complex response of basophil to quercetin, while indirectly suggest PI3K as the major intracellular target of this compound also in human basophils.20839337
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) and CLL-type monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) show differential expression of molecules involved in lymphoid tissue homing.
Rawstron Andy C, Shingles Jane, de Tute Ruth, Bennett Fiona, Jack Andrew S, Hillmen Peter
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
The aim of this study was to screen for cell surface markers that could discriminate CLL-type MBL from CLL or identify CLL cases likely to have stable disease.
Six color flow cytometry was performed on CLL-type MBL (n = 94) and CLL (n = 387) at diagnosis or relapse; 39 cases had poor-risk chromosomal abnormalities (17p and/or 11q deletion). Expression of 30 markers was analysed: CCR6, CD10, CD103, CD11c, CD138, CD200, CD22, CD23, CD24, CD25, CD27, CD31, CD38, CD39, CD43, CD49d, CD5, CD52, CD62L, CD63, CD79b, CD81, CD86, CD95, CXCR5, HLADR, IgD, IgG, IgM, LAIR1.
There was no difference in expression between CLL-type MBL and CLL for the majority of markers. Differential expression was observed for several markers, mainly between MBL and CLL cases with adverse-risk chromosomal abnormalities. These differences included lower expression of CD38 (9.4-fold lower, P = 0.007) and CD49d (3.2-fold lower, P = 0.008) and higher expression of LAIR-1 (3.7-fold higher, P = 0.003), CXCR5 (1.25-fold higher, P = 0.002), and CCR6 (1.9-fold higher P < 0.001) on CLL-type MBL compared to CLL with adverse chromosomal abnormalities. CD62L (L-selectin) which mediates lymphocyte adhesion to endothelial venules of lymphoid tissue, was expressed at a significantly different level between CLL-type MBL and both CLL sub-groups, with 1.3-fold lower (P = 0.04) expression levels on the MBL cases. However, there was broad overlap in expression levels.
CLL-type MBL is phenotypically identical to CLL for a very broad range of markers. Differential expression is predominantly related to known prognostic markers and proteins involved in homing to lymphoid tissue.
© 2010 International Clinical Cytometry Society.20829607
Inactivation of macrophage Rab7 by Burkholderia cenocepacia.
Huynh Kassidy K, Plumb Jonathan D, Downey Gregory P, Valvano Miguel A, Grinstein Sergio
Journal of innate immunity
Strains of the Burkholderia cepacia complex can survive within macrophages by arresting the maturation of phagocytic vacuoles. The bacteria preclude fusion of the phagosome with lysosomes by a process that is poorly understood. Using murine macrophages, we investigated the stage at which maturation is arrested and analyzed the underlying mechanism. Vacuoles containing B. cenocepacia strain J2315, an isolate of the transmissible ET12 clone, recruited Rab5 and synthesized phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate, indicating progression to the early phagosomal stage. Despite the fact that the B. cenocepacia-containing vacuoles rarely fused with lysosomes, they could nevertheless acquire the late phagosomal markers CD63 and Rab7. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching and use of a probe that detects Rab7-guanosine triphosphate indicated that activation of Rab7 was impaired by B. cenocepacia, accounting at least in part for the inability of the vacuole to merge with lysosomes. The Rab7 defect was not due to excessive cholesterol accumulation and was confined to the infected vacuoles. Jointly, these experiments indicate that B. cenocepacia express virulence factors capable of interfering with Rab7 function and thereby with membrane traffic.
Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.20828556
Neutrophil elastase and proteinase 3 trafficking routes in myelomonocytic cells.
Källquist Linda, Rosén Hanna, Nordenfelt Pontus, Calafat Jero, Janssen Hans, Persson Ann-Maj, Hansson Markus, Olsson Inge
Experimental cell research
Neutrophil elastase (NE) and proteinase 3 (PR3) differ in intracellular localization, which may reflect different trafficking mechanisms of the precursor forms when synthesized at immature stages of neutrophils. To shed further light on these mechanisms, we compared the trafficking of precursor NE (proNE) and precursor PR3 (proPR3). Like proNE [1], proPR3 interacted with CD63 upon heterologous co-expression in COS cells but endogenous interaction was not detected although cell surface proNE/proPR3/CD63 were co-endocytosed in myelomonocytic cells. Cell surface proNE/proPR3 turned over more rapidly than cell surface CD63 consistent with processing/degradation of the pro-proteases but recycling of CD63. Colocalization of proNE/proPR3/CD63 with clathrin and Rab 7 suggested trafficking through coated vesicles and late endosomes. Partial caveolar trafficking of proNE/CD63 but not proPR3 was suggested by colocalization with caveolin-1. Blocking the C-terminus of proNE/proPR3 by creating a fusion with FK506 binding protein inhibited endosomal re-uptake of proNE but not proPR3 indicating "pro(C)"-peptide-dependent structural/conformational requirements for proNE but not for proPR3 endocytosis. The NE aminoacid residue Y199 of a proposed NE sorting motif that interacts with AP-3 [2] was not required for proNE processing, sorting or endocytosis in rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cells expressing heterologous Y199-deleted proNE; this suggests operation of another AP-3-link for proNE targeting. Our results show intracellular multi-step trafficking to be different between proNE and proPR3 consistent with their differential subcellular NE/PR3 localization in neutrophils.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.20801889
Selective fusion of azurophilic granules with Leishmania-containing phagosomes in human neutrophils.
Mollinedo Faustino, Janssen Hans, de la Iglesia-Vicente Janis, Villa-Pulgarin Janny A, Calafat Jero
The Journal of biological chemistry
Leishmania parasites use polymorphonuclear neutrophils as intermediate hosts before their ultimate delivery to macrophages following engulfment of parasite-infected neutrophils. This leads to a silent and unrecognized entry of Leishmania into the macrophage host cell. Neutrophil function depends on its cytoplasmic granules, but their mobilization and role in how Leishmania parasites evade intracellular killing in neutrophils remain undetermined. Here, we have found by ultrastructural approaches that neutrophils ingested Leishmania major promastigotes, and azurophilic granules fused in a preferential way with parasite-containing phagosomes, without promoting parasite killing. Azurophilic granules, identified by the granule marker myeloperoxidase, also fused with Leishmania donovani-engulfed vacuoles in human neutrophils. In addition, the azurophilic membrane marker CD63 was also detected in the vacuole surrounding the parasite, and in the fusion of azurophilic granules with the parasite-engulfed phagosome. Tertiary and specific granules, involved in vacuole acidification and superoxide anion generation, hardly fused with Leishmania-containing phagosomes. L. major interaction with neutrophils did not elicit production of reactive oxygen species or mobilization of tertiary and specific granules. By using immunogold electron microscopy approaches in the engulfment of L. major and L. donovani by human neutrophils, we did not find a significant contribution of endoplasmic reticulum to the formation of Leishmania-containing vacuoles. Live Leishmania parasites were required to be optimally internalized by neutrophils. Our data suggest that Leishmania promastigotes modulate their uptake by neutrophils, and regulate granule fusion processes in a rather selective way to favor parasite survival in human neutrophils.20720153
Protein mobilities and P-selectin storage in Weibel-Palade bodies.
Kiskin Nikolai I, Hellen Nicola, Babich Victor, Hewlett Lindsay, Knipe Laura, Hannah Matthew J, Carter Tom
Journal of cell science
Using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) we measured the mobilities of EGFP-tagged soluble secretory proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and in individual Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs) at early (immature) and late (mature) stages in their biogenesis. Membrane proteins (P-selectin, CD63, Rab27a) were also studied in individual WPBs. In the ER, soluble secretory proteins were mobile; however, following insertion into immature WPBs larger molecules (VWF, Proregion, tPA) and P-selectin became immobilised, whereas small proteins (ssEGFP, eotaxin-3) became less mobile. WPB maturation led to further decreases in mobility of small proteins and CD63. Acute alkalinisation of mature WPBs selectively increased the mobilities of small soluble proteins without affecting larger molecules and the membrane proteins. Disruption of the Proregion-VWF paracrystalline core by prolonged incubation with NH(4)Cl rendered P-selectin mobile while VWF remained immobile. FRAP of P-selectin mutants revealed that immobilisation most probably involves steric entrapment of the P-selectin extracellular domain by the Proregion-VWF paracrystal. Significantly, immobilisation contributed to the enrichment of P-selectin in WPBs; a mutation of P-selectin preventing immobilisation led to a failure of enrichment. Together these data shed new light on the transitions that occur for soluble and membrane proteins following their entry and storage into post-Golgi-regulated secretory organelles.20718781
Serum total tryptase levels are increased in patients with active chronic urticaria.
Ferrer M, Nuñez-Córdoba J M, Luquin E, Grattan C E, De la Borbolla J M, Sanz M L, Schwartz L B
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
We have demonstrated previously mast cell histamine release upon incubation with chronic urticaria (CU) sera, presumably by degranulation.
To explore total and mature tryptase in order to assess whether any increase in total tryptase levels is due in part to mast cell degranulation or to mast cell burden. We also wanted to explore differences between the autoimmune groups called idiopathic (serum unable to activate basophils), and to correlate total and mature tryptase levels with different urticaria features.
We measured total and mature tryptase serum levels in 81 CU patients, 16 atopic donors and 21 healthy control sera. We assessed autoimmunity by measuring the CD63 expression in normal basophil donors upon incubation with CU sera.
We found significantly higher levels of total tryptase in the sera of CU patients (6.6 ±4.1 μg/L) than in sera from healthy non-atopic subjects (4.4 ±2.8 μg/L) and from atopic subjects (4.5 ±1.7 μg/L). Mature tryptase levels were undetectable (<1 ng/mL). Total tryptase levels in the autoimmune urticaria group were significantly higher (9.8 ±5.4 μg/L) than the idiopathic urticaria group (4.4 ±2.2 μg/L). A significant difference in total tryptase was found between symptomatic patients (7.3 ±4.1 μg/L) compared with asymptomatic ones (5.7 ±4.1 μg/L) at the time of venesection. No difference was found in mature tryptase levels either.
Total elevated tryptase levels are not accompanied by an elevated mature tryptase levels, as might be expected if the serum levels reflected mast cell degranulation.
© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.20701731
Apheresis platelet concentrates contain platelet-derived and endothelial cell-derived microparticles.
Rank A, Nieuwland R, Liebhardt S, Iberer M, Grützner S, Toth B, Pihusch R
Vox sanguinis
Microparticles (MP) are membrane vesicles with thrombogenic and immunomodulatory properties. We determined MP subgroups from resting platelets, activated platelets and endothelial cells in donors and apheresis platelet concentrates (PC).
MP were double stained with annexin V and CD61 (platelet-derived MP; PMP), P-selectin or CD63 (MP from activated platelets) and CD144 plus E-selectin (endothelial cell-derived MP; EMP) and detected by flow cytometry in platelet donors (n=36) and apheresis PC (n=11; Trima™).
PC contained MP, mainly from resting platelets [93% (90-95)], and minor fractions of PMP from activated platelets [P-selectin(+) or CD63(+); 4·8% (3·2-7·7) and 2·6% (2·0-4·0)]. Compared to donors, levels of annexin V+ MP, PMP, P-selectin(+) and CD63(+) MP were 1·7-, 2·3-, 8·6- and 3·1-fold higher in PC (all P<0·05). During storage (1-5 days), levels of annexin V+ MP and PMP did not increase, although small increases in the fraction of P-selectin(+) or CD63(+) MP occurred (both P<0·05). PC also contained EMP, which were 2·6- to 3·7-fold enriched in PC compared to donors (P<0·05).
Transfusion of apheresis PC also results in transfusion of HLA-carrying PMP and EMP. This might counteract the aim of reducing transfused HLA load by leucodepletion. The increases in PMP exposing P-selectin or CD63 reflect mild platelet activation during storage. We conclude that in leucodepleted platelet apheresis using fluidized particle bed technology, MP are harvested mainly from the donor by apheresis. Improvement in apheresis technology might reduce MP load.
© 2010 The Author(s). Vox Sanguinis © 2010 International Society of Blood Transfusion.20701613
Basophil activation test is better but not good enough for the diagnosis of hymenoptera venom allergy: the problem of cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants.
Altmann F
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
20696467
Cellular origin of platelet-derived microparticles in vivo.
Rank Andreas, Nieuwland Rienk, Delker Ruth, Köhler Anton, Toth Bettina, Pihusch Verena, Wilkowski Ralf, Pihusch Rudolf
Thrombosis research
Microparticles (MP), presumably of platelet origin, are the most abundant microparticles in blood. To which extent such MP may also directly originate from megakaryocytes, however, is unknown. During hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, patients undergo total body irradiation which leads to an irreversible destruction of hematopoiesis.
We studied the levels of "platelet-derived" MP (PMP) in 13 patients before and after total body irradiation with 12 Gy (4 Gy for 3 days, dose rate 4.5 cGy/min). PMP were isolated and double-stained with annexin V and anti-CD61. In 6 patients, we additionally analyzed MP exposing P-selectin or CD63.
PMP rapidly declined upon total body irradiation, which was 2.4-fold faster than platelet disappearance. In contrast, the kinetics of MP exposing P-selectin or CD63 was comparable to platelets.
Since CD61-positive MP disappear faster than platelets or MP exposing P-selectin or CD63, our data indicate that MP exposing P-selectin or CD63 are likely to originate from platelets, whereas at least a major fraction of CD61-exposing MP is likely to originate from megakaryocytes in vivo.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.20693981
TIMP-4 and CD63: new prognostic biomarkers in human astrocytomas.
Rorive Sandrine, Lopez Xavier Moles, Maris Calliope, Trepant Anne-Laure, Sauvage Sébastien, Sadeghi Niloufar, Roland Isabelle, Decaestecker Christine, Salmon Isabelle
Modern pathology : an official journal of the United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology, Inc
Based on the molecular profiling of astrocytomas, we previously identified a series of genes involved in astrocytoma invasion. Of these, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-4 (TIMP-4) was found to be overexpressed in pilocytic astrocytomas relative to diffuse astrocytomas of any histological grade. Although some data suggest that TIMP-4 may be an anti-tumoral actor in astrocytomas, recent findings challenge this concept. The present study aims to investigate the diagnostic and prognostic values of TIMP-4 and its putative partner CD63 in human astrocytomas. Tissue microarray and image analysis were first carried out to quantitatively analyze the immunohistochemical expression of these proteins in 471 gliomas including 354 astrocytomas. Pathological semi-quantitative scores of both markers' expression were then established and correlated to astrocytoma diagnosis and patient prognosis. TIMP-4 and CD63 expressions were both overexpressed in astrocytomas compared with oligodendrogliomas (P<0.001) and in pilocytic astrocytomas compared with grade II diffuse astrocytomas (P<0.001). In glioblastomas, high TIMP-4/CD63 co-expression scores were identified as independent prognostic factors associated with progression and shorter survival. In conclusion, this work provides the first evidence of a TIMP-4/CD63 association in astrocytoma tumor cells. It identifies TIMP-4 and CD63 as markers of the astrocytic phenotype in patients with gliomas. In addition, this work highlights the contribution of high TIMP-4/CD63 co-expression to the adverse outcomes of patients with glioblastomas.20691696
Neutrophil activation during transmigration in vivo and in vitro A translational study using the skin chamber model.
Paulsson Josefin M, Jacobson Stefan H, Lundahl Joachim
Journal of immunological methods
Neutrophil transmigration can be studied in vitro by use of the transwell model and in vivo by the skin chamber model. Activation during transmigration involves translocation of secretory vesicles and granules to the plasma- and phagolysosome membranes. In this study, we compared the skin chamber model with the transwell model, focusing on the mobilization of CR1 (CD35), CR3 (CD11b/CD18) and CD63 from intracellular vesicles and granules. In addition, functional responses towards a bacterial related stimulus, formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP), in terms of CR3 expression and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were assessed. Discrepancies between the skin chamber model and the transwell model were observed. The expression of CR1 increased following in vivo transmigration (p<0.001) and, in contrast, decreased following in vitro transmigration (p=0.004). Furthermore, CR1 was mobilized following an isolation procedure included in the transwell model. The expression of CR3 increased following both in vivo (p<0.001) and in vitro (p=0.03) transmigration. However, in vitro transmigration did not influence the fMLP induced CR3 expression which was significantly increased following in vivo transmigration (p=0.01). In addition, the fMLP induced production of ROS was significantly reduced following in vitro transmigration (p=0.002) but unaltered after in vivo transmigration, indicating differences between the impact of the two systems on cellular activation. The observed discrepancies between the two models might be partly explained by granule mobilization and neutrophil priming, induced during the isolation procedure included in the transwell model, which results in an altered cellular activation. Therefore, mobilization of granules needs to be accounted for when interpreting data from different model systems.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.20675032
Diethyltoluamide (DEET) increases CD63 expression in a contact urticaria patient's basophils.
Galassi N, Romero D S Fernández, Yeyati E, Malbrán A
Allergologia et immunopathologia
20670106
Protein phosphatase inhibitor calyculin-A modulates activation markers in TRAP-stimulated human platelets.
Simon Zsuzsa, Kiss Andrea, Erdödi Ferenc, Setiadi Hendra, Beke Debreceni Ildikó, Nagy Béla, Kappelmayer János
Platelets
Platelet activation is accompanied with the phosphorylation of a number of proteins on serine (Ser) and threonine (Thr) residues. The phosphorylation level of these proteins is dependent upon the protein kinase/phosphatase activity ratio. The aim of this study was to investigate the consequences of inhibiting protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and 2A (PP2A) on platelet functions. Protein phosphatases were inhibited by preincubation of platelet rich plasma (PRP) samples with calyculin-A (CLA). Subsequently, platelets were activated by thrombin-receptor activating peptide (TRAP) and platelet aggregation, platelet-derived microparticle (PMP) formation, surface expressions of P-selectin (CD62), lysosome-associated membrane protein (CD63), glycoprotein Ib and IIb were examined. Phosphatase activity was determined by using phosphorylated 20 kDa myosin light chain (P-MLC20) as substrate. In CLA-treated platelets substantial decrease of P-MLC20 phosphatase activity was observed. CLA significantly suppressed TRAP-induced surface expression of P-selectin and CD63 in a concentration-dependent manner as compared to non-treated samples and moderately decreased platelet aggregation. In TRAP-activated samples, 50 nM of CLA pretreatment completely abolished the level of PMPs and the prevention of GPIb downregulation was also observed; however, no difference was found in GPIIb expression. In conclusion, PP1 and PP2A-catalyzed dephosphorylation processes have crucial roles in PMP formation and in the regulation of alpha-granule and lysosome secretion in human platelets.20634433
Biliary exosomes influence cholangiocyte regulatory mechanisms and proliferation through interaction with primary cilia.
Masyuk Anatoliy I, Huang Bing Q, Ward Christopher J, Gradilone Sergio A, Banales Jesus M, Masyuk Tatyana V, Radtke Brynn, Splinter Patrick L, LaRusso Nicholas F
American journal of physiology. Gastrointestinal and liver physiology
Exosomes are small extracellular vesicles that are thought to participate in intercellular communication. Recent work from our laboratory suggests that, in normal and cystic liver, exosome-like vesicles accumulate in the lumen of intrahepatic bile ducts, presumably interacting with cholangiocyte cilia. However, direct evidence for exosome-ciliary interaction is limited and the physiological relevance of such interaction remains unknown. Thus, in this study, we tested the hypothesis that biliary exosomes are involved in intercellular communication by interacting with cholangiocyte cilia and inducing intracellular signaling and functional responses. Exosomes were isolated from rat bile by differential ultracentrifugation and characterized by scanning, transmission, and immunoelectron microscopy. The exosome-ciliary interaction and its effects on ERK1/2 signaling, expression of the microRNA, miR-15A, and cholangiocyte proliferation were studied on ciliated and deciliated cultured normal rat cholangiocytes. Our results show that bile contains vesicles identified as exosomes by their size, characteristic "saucer-shaped" morphology, and specific markers, CD63 and Tsg101. When NRCs were exposed to isolated biliary exosomes, the exosomes attached to cilia, inducing a decrease of the phosphorylated-to-total ERK1/2 ratio, an increase of miR-15A expression, and a decrease of cholangiocyte proliferation. All these effects of biliary exosomes were abolished by the pharmacological removal of cholangiocyte cilia. Our findings suggest that bile contains exosomes functioning as signaling nanovesicles and influencing intracellular regulatory mechanisms and cholangiocyte proliferation through interaction with primary cilia.20633031
Expression of CD203c and CD63 in human basophils: relationship to differential regulation of piecemeal and anaphylactic degranulation processes.
MacGlashan D
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Activation of human basophils results in the release of many different mediators and the expression of new cell surface proteins. The markers CD63 and CD203c have been used in recent years to assess basophil activation but there have been many studies that demonstrate that expression of these markers can be dissociated from histamine release.
To determine the signal transduction requirements for CD203c and CD63 expression.
The current study began by exploring the dependency of CD203c and CD63 expression on protein kinase C (PKC) using known selective inhibitors of PKC.
Between 30 and 300 nm, Ro-31-8220 and bisindoylmaleimide II (Bis II) had no effect on formyl-met-leu-phe- or anti-IgE-induced CD63 or CD203c but enhanced IgE-mediated expression of CD63 by an average of 15-fold at concentrations >1 microm. These results led to the suggestion that these inhibitors altered the normal pathways of degranulation (by a non-PKC dependent mechanism), shifting the normal presence of piecemeal degranulation to the process termed anaphylactic degranulation (AND). Morphological studies demonstrated that concentrations of Ro-31-8220 and Bis II>1 mum dramatically increased the presence of degranulation sacs, a morphological feature of AND.
It is proposed that CD63 expression results from only the AND form of histamine release.20608919
Benefit of the basophil activation test in deciding when to reintroduce cow's milk in allergic children.
Rubio A, Vivinus-Nébot M, Bourrier T, Saggio B, Albertini M, Bernard A
Allergy
Oral challenges are required to establish the persistence or resolution of IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy (CMA). Determining the appropriate timing for challenging is the main difficulty. The benefit of the basophil activation test (BAT) in predicting a child's reaction to the oral challenge was evaluated and compared to the specific IgE and skin prick tests' (SPT) results.
One hundred and twelve consecutive children with CMA admitted for an oral challenge to reassess their allergy were included. Allergen-induced basophil activation was detected as a CD63-upregulation by flow cytometry.
Thirty-six children (32%) had a positive oral challenge. The percentage of activated basophils in patients with a positive challenge (mean = 20.9; SD = 18.8) was significantly higher than that of patients with a negative challenge (mean = 3.9; SD = 9.8, P < 0.0001), and was well correlated with the eliciting dose of cow's milk (P < 0.0001). The BAT had an efficiency of 90%, a sensitivity of 91%, a specificity of 90%, and positive and negative predictive values of 81% and 96% in detecting persistently allergic patients. The area under the ROC curve was 0.866. These scores were higher than those obtained with SPT and IgE values, whichever positivity cut-point was chosen. Referring to a decisional algorithm combining BAT, specific IgE and SPT allowed the correct identification of 94% of patients as tolerant or persistently allergic to cow's milk proteins (CMP) in our cohort.
The BAT could be a valuable tool in the management of paediatric CMA in addition to specific IgE quantification and SPT, by contributing in determining whether an oral challenge can safely be undertaken.
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.20608915
Robust expression of CCR3 as a single basophil selection marker in flow cytometry.
Hausmann O V, Gentinetta T, Fux M, Ducrest S, Pichler W J, Dahinden C A
Allergy
Basophil activation tests (BAT) rely on different combinations of basophil selection and activation markers. Whereas activation markers, especially CD63, are widely validated, the most suitable and robust marker for basophil selection is still a matter of debate.
Comparison of cell surface expression of two commonly used basophil selection markers (IgE, CD123/HLA-DR) with CCR3 in an unselected group of atopic and nonatopic donors in resting and activated basophils.
EDTA blood of 94 healthy adults, about half of them atopic by history, was analyzed using two different staining strategies: anti-CD123-PE/anti-HLA-DR-PerCP/anti-lin1-FITC and anti-IgE-FITC/anti-CD3-PerCP/anti-CCR3-PE. Additionally 40 pollen-allergic patients were recruited for the assessment of CCR3 expression after basophil activation.
In resting basophils, cell surface expression of the three basophil selection markers was most constant for CCR3. IgE gating strategy showed the highest variation and up to 80% of nonbasophils in the selected gate in certain donors. During basophil activation, a shift of the mean fluorescence intensity for CCR3 toward the lower third of the CCR3-positive population could be demonstrated, but neither were CCR3-positive cells significantly lost for further analysis nor was differentiation between CCR3-positive and CCR3-negative cell populations hampered by this shift.
CCR3 is a stable and highly expressed basophil selection marker, independent of the atopic background or basophil activation state and allows an accurate identification of basophils without need of a second marker. The basophil markers CD123/HLA-DR and IgE showed significantly higher interindividual variability in cell surface expression and are therefore less suited as selection markers.
© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.20581771
Adrenaline inhibits the immunological activation of human basophils at pharmacological and ultra-low doses.
Mannaioni Pier Francesco, Mastroianni Rosanna, Mastrangelo Domenico
Medical science monitor : international medical journal of experimental and clinical research
Adrenaline is known to inhibit the immunological activation of human basophils. The same effect can be obtained with ultra-low doses of histamine.
The present investigation was undertaken to verify the effects of ultra-low doses of adrenaline on the immunological activation of human basophils. For this purpose, purified human basophils were isolated from the blood of atopic donors and the response of the basophils to anti-IgE antiserum was evaluated by measuring the release of histamine and the expressions of the activation markers CD63 and CD203c on the basophil surface.
The antigenic activation of basophils was significantly decreased by adrenaline at both pharmacological and ultra-low doses. The inhibiting effects of adrenaline were reversed by the beta blocker propranolol at either dose level.
Although seemingly unexplainable by the currently accepted pharmacological principles, this phenomenon, already reported for histamine, deserves further investigation.20571347
Multiple desmoplastic cellular neurothekeomas localized to the face of a 16-year-old boy.
García-Gutiérrez Monica, Toussaint-Caire Sonia, González-Sánchez Pablo, Ortiz-Hidalgo Carlos
The American Journal of dermatopathology
Cellular neurothekeomas are relative uncommon benign dermal tumors of uncertain histogenesis. Most commonly they arise as a solitary papule or nodule on the head and neck or upper trunk of young adults with a slight female predominance. There has been only 1 previous report of multiple neurothekeomas. The patient described herein was a 16-year-old otherwise healthy boy who presented with approximately 30 facial papules that arose over the course of 6 months and progressively enlarged. Histologically, all lesions were composed of spindled to epithelioid cells, but varied in the degree of cellularity and dermal sclerosis. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the cells of interest expressed S100A6, vimentin, CD63 (NKI/C3), PGP 9.5, and factor XIIIa and were negative for CD68, glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), S-100, HMB-45, epithelial membrane antigen, actin, and CD57 consistent with a diagnosis of multiple desmoplastic cellular neurothekeomas.20558998
Effect on cell surface markers following allergen-induced desensitization of human whole-blood basophils.
Lund Gitte, Jacobi Henrik, Skov Per Stahl, Holm Jens, Lund Kaare
International archives of allergy and immunology
Allergen-specific immunotherapy (SIT) leads to reduced symptoms upon allergen exposure through as yet unresolved mechanisms. Desensitization of basophils to specific allergens during the updosing phase of injection immunotherapy may contribute to the clinical effect of SIT. Here we report a protocol for efficient in vitro allergen-mediated desensitization of basophils in whole blood and the effect of desensitization on the expression of basophil activation markers (CD203c and CD63) as well as histamine release in response to allergen challenge.
Whole blood from grass pollen-allergic subjects was incubated with Phleum pratense extract by stepwise increase of the allergen concentration in the culture from well below to well above the allergen threshold concentration for activation of basophils. Desensitization was determined by measuring the expression of the basophil activation markers CD63 and CD203c by FACS following challenge with high allergen concentrations.
The basophil desensitization protocol reported here affected both the expression of the cell-surface markers and the levels of histamine release. Following the stepwise desensitization procedure the whole-blood basophils were not activated when challenged with more than 10-fold increased allergen concentration.
We have established a protocol for basophil desensitization. By mimicking the updosing phase of immunotherapy we raised the allergen threshold for basophil activation and obtained efficient desensitization for all donors. We showed that conditions leading to desensitization affect histamine release and expression of different basophil markers alike.
Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.20557358
Role of immune serum in the killing of Helicobacter pylori by macrophages.
Keep Stacey, Borlace Glenn, Butler Ross, Brooks Doug
Helicobacter
Helicobacter pylori infection can lead to the development of gastritis, peptic ulcers and gastric cancer, which makes this bacterium an important concern for human health. Despite evoking a strong immune response in the host, H. pylori persists, requiring complex antibiotic therapy for eradication. Here we have studied the impact of a patient's immune serum on H. pylori in relation to macrophage uptake, phagosome maturation, and bacterial killing.
Primary human macrophages were infected in vitro with both immune serum-treated and control H. pylori. The ability of primary human macrophages to kill H. pylori was characterized at various time points after infection. H. pylori phagosome maturation was analyzed by confocal immune fluorescence microscopy using markers specific for H. pylori, early endosomes (EEA1), late endosomes (CD63) and lysosomes (LAMP-1).
Immune serum enhanced H. pylori uptake into macrophages when compared to control bacteria. However, a sufficient inoculum remained for recovery of viable H. pylori from macrophages, at 8 hours after infection, for both the serum-treated and control groups. Both serum-treated and control H. pylori phagosomes acquired EEA1 (15 minutes), CD63 and LAMP-1 (30 minutes). These markers were then retained for the rest of an 8 hour time course.
While immune sera appeared to have a slight positive effect on bacterial uptake, both serum-treated and control H. pylori were not eliminated by macrophages. Furthermore, the same disruptions to phagosome maturation were observed for both serum-treated and control H. pylori. We conclude that to eliminate H. pylori, a strategy is required to restore the normal process of phagosome maturation and enable effective macrophage killing of H. pylori, following a host immune response.20553222
The effect of tert-butyl hydroperoxide on hepatic transcriptome expression patterns in the striped sea bream (Lithognathus mormyrus; Teleostei).
Auslander Meirav, Neumann Peter M, Tom Moshe
Free radical research
The study was aimed at examining the effects of tert-butyl hydroperoxide (tBHP) on hepatic transcriptome expression patterns of the teleost fish Lithognathus mormyrus. tBHP is an organic hydro-peroxide, widely used as a model pro-oxidant. It generates the reactive oxygen species (ROS) tert-butoxyl and tert-butylperoxyl. Complementary DNAs of tBHP-treated vs control fish were applied onto a previously produced cDNA microarray of approximately 1500 unique sequences. The effects of the tBHP application were demonstrated by leukocyte infiltration into the liver and by differential expression of various genes, some already known to be involved in ROS-related responses. Indicator genes of putative ROS effects were: aldehyde dehydrogenase 3A2, Heme oxygenase and the hemopexin-like protein. Putative indicators of transendothelial leukocyte migration and function were: p22phox, Rac1 and CD63-like genes. Interestingly, 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase was significantly down-regulated in response to all treatments. Several non-annotated genes revealed uniform directions of differential expression in response to all treatments.20546206
Function and activation state of platelets in vitro depend on apheresis modality.
Macher S, Sipurzynski-Budrass S, Rosskopf K, Rohde E, Griesbacher A, Groselj-Strele A, Lanzer G, Schallmoser K
Vox sanguinis
In multicomponent collection, various blood components are prepared during one apheresis process. The aim of this prospective crossover study was to compare the function, metabolic parameters and activation state of fresh and stored platelets (PLTs) collected by two different cell separators.
Twenty-four donors underwent apheresis on each of two cell separators (Fenwal Amicus(®) and CaridianBCT Trima Accel(®)) with an interval of at least 2 months between donations. Per donation, one double dose of PLT concentrate (PC) and one unit of packed red-blood-cells were collected. In total, 48 single unit PCs were tested for pH, glucose, bicarbonate, lactate, potassium and LDH concentration during 7 days of storage. PLT function was analysed by aggregometry, rotation thrombelastometry and hypotonic shock response. The PLT surface expression of P-selectin (CD62P) and LAMP-3 (CD63) was estimated by flow cytometry.
During storage, metabolic parameters were well maintained in both groups, but levels of glucose and pH were significantly lower, while lactate and LDH were significantly higher in Amicus(®)-PCs. Amicus(®)-derived PLTs were significantly more activated as evidenced by higher CD62P and CD63 expression. In parallel, the in vitro function of Amicus(®)-PLTs was significantly reduced compared to Trima(®)-PLTs.
In multicomponent apheresis, standardized PLT collection is effective and well tolerated. The higher activation of Amicus(®)-derived PLTs may be because of the divergent centrifugation modalities during collection. Possible consequences for the clinical outcome of thrombocytopenic patients will be evaluated in further trials.
© 2010 The Author(s). Vox Sanguinis © 2010 International Society of Blood Transfusion.20539903
The in vitro effects of niacin on platelet biomarkers in human volunteers.
Serebruany Victor, Malinin Alex, Aradi Daniel, Kuliczkowski Wiktor, Norgard Nicholas B, Boden William E
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Niacin is a natural pyridine derivative, proven to favorably modulate the blood lipid profile by increasing levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and by reducing total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, triglycerides, and Lp (a) lipoprotein concentrations. Considering that platelet activity is important in predicting vascular outcomes, and that HDL heavily constitutes platelet cellular membranes, we sought to evaluate the effect of niacin on human platelet activity indices. The blood obtained from 30 aspirin-naïve volunteers was preincubated with escalating concentrations of niacin in vitro. Platelet tests included whole blood and plasma aggregometry, rapid cartridge-based analyser, expression of major surface receptors by flow cytometry, and plasma prostaglandins by ELISA. Preincubation of blood with niacin at 0.3, 1.0 and 3.0 mM resulted in significant inhibition of maximal adenosine diphosphate (ADP)- (p=0.03), and collagen-induced platelet aggregation (p=0.01), and reduced activity by VerifyNow (p=0.007) bedside analyser. Surface platelet PAR-1 (MoAb WEDE-15; p=0.04), and vitronectin (CD51/CD61; p=0.02) receptors were up-regulated. Niacin was associated with a two- to three-fold increase of thromboxane B2, prostaglandins D2, and E2. Formation of platelet-monocyte microparticles (CD14+CD151), and expression of PECAM-1 (CD31), thrombospondin (CD36), GP IIb/IIIa (CD41a) antigen, and activity with MoAb PAC-1, GPIb (CD42b), P-selectin (CD62p), LAMP-3 (CD63), LAMP-1 (CD107a), CD40-ligand (CD154), GP37 (CD165), were not affected by niacin, suggesting no effect on prostacyclin release. In conclusion, niacin in vitro affects platelet activity by mildly inhibiting aggregation, and stimulating significant prostaglandin release, with mostly intact major platelet receptor expression. The effect of niacin is unique, differs from other known antiplatelet agents, and suggests potential opportunities for therapeutic combination, particularly in patients with low levels of HDL-C. These preliminary data, while intriguing, require confirmation in subjects receiving orally dosed extended-release niacin in order to determine whether these findings are clinically relevant.20538801
A revised model for the secretion of tPA and cytokines from cultured endothelial cells.
Knipe Laura, Meli Athinoula, Hewlett Lindsay, Bierings Ruben, Dempster John, Skehel Paul, Hannah Matthew J, Carter Tom
Blood
Endothelial cells are reported to contain several distinct populations of regulated secretory organelles, including Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs), the tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) organelle, and the type-2 chemokine-containing organelle. We show that the tPA and type-2 organelles in human endothelial cells represent a single compartment primarily responsible for unstimulated secretion of tPA or, in cells exposed to interleukin-1β (IL-1β), the cytokines IL-8, IL-6, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and growth-regulated oncogene-α (GRO-α). This compartment was distinct from WPBs in that it lacked detectable von Willebrand factor, P-selectin, Rab27a, or CD63 immunoreactivity, displayed no time-dependent decrease in intragranule pH, underwent detectable unstimulated exocytosis, and was very poorly responsive to Ca(2+)-elevating secretagogues. WPBs could also contain tPA, and in IL-1β-treated cells, IL-8, IL-6, MCP-1, and GRO-α, and were the primary source for histamine or ionomycin-stimulated secretion of these molecules. However, analysis of the storage efficiency of cytokines and tPA revealed that all were very poorly stored compared with von Willebrand factor. The nonmammalian, nonsecretory protein EGFP, when expressed in the secretory pathway, also entered WPBs and had a storage efficiency similar to tPA and the cytokines tested. Based on these data, we proposed a revised model for storage and secretion of cytokines and tPA.20412702
Membrane proteinase 3 (mPR3) expression on neutrophils is not increased in localized Wegener's granulomatosis (WG) and Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS).
Holle Julia U, Wu Q J, Moosig Frank, Gross Wolfgang L, Csernok Elena
Clinical and experimental rheumatology
The aim of this study was to analyse mPR3 expression on neutrophils in two Anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitides (AAV), namely WG (localised vs. generalised) and Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) and other inflammatory disorders, in order to evaluate (i) whether the pattern of mPR3 expression is specific for AAV and (ii) to assess whether the mPR3high status is associated with clinically distinct disease stages of WG (localised vs. generalised).
Localised WG (n=15), generalised WG (n=55), Churg-Strauss Syndrome (CSS) (n=20), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (n=15), Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) (n=22) and healthy controls (n=30) were analysed. mPR3 and CD63 expression on surface of neutrophils were assessed by flow cytometric analysis on isolated neutrophils and whole blood.
In patients with genWG and SLE, an increased percentage of mPR3+ neutrophils and an elevated level of mPR3 expression compared to healthy controls were found (percentage: p=0.001, p=0.000; MFI ratio: p=0.038, p=0.019, respectively). There was no increased frequency of mPR3+ neutrophils in CSS. Within the group of WG, an elevated level of mPR3 expression was significantly associated with disease stage (genWG and not locWG), and in genWG with disease activity and the presence of ANCA.
The mPR3high status is associated with generalised WG and correlates with disease activity and ANCA status in generalised WG. An increased proportion of mPR3-positive neutrophils is not specific for AAV.20533392
CD203c-based basophil activation test in allergy diagnosis: characteristics and differences to CD63 upregulation.
Sturm Eva M, Kranzelbinder Bettina, Heinemann Akos, Groselj-Strele Andrea, Aberer Werner, Sturm Gunter J
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
The basophil activation test (BAT) based on CD203c upregulation has been validated as a reliable tool for the diagnosis of IgE-mediated allergies. Nevertheless, CD203c-based BAT is hardly comparable with that of CD63-based tests, as the mechanisms of CD203c versus CD63 induction differ considerably. The aim of the present study was to identify potent influencing factors of the CD203c-based BAT and to emphasize differences between CD63 and CD203c detection.
CD203c-based BAT was determined in 82 healthy controls and in 79 allergic patients. The effects of interleukin (IL)-3 and degranulation enhancing substances were investigated and compared with CD63 upregulation. Furthermore, the influence of different storage conditions and incubation times was evaluated and the impact of antiallergic drugs on the test results was assessed.
CD203c and CD63 expression was rapidly upregulated reaching a maximum after 20-30 min. Basophil CD203c upregulation assayed after storage times up to 48 h declined already after 4 h. IL-3 treatment increased CD203c and CD63 baseline levels and decreased basophil CD203c responses in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, cytochalasin B and latrunculin B did not affect CD203c responses but decreased CD63-based BAT. Finally, therapeutic concentrations of dimetindene and desloratadine did not affect CD203c upregulation.
CD203c-based basophil activation test should be performed preferentially within 4 h after taking the blood samples. Priming and degranulation-enhancing factors are not required for CD203c-based BAT. In contrast to skin testing, CD203c-based BAT can be performed in patients undergoing antiallergic treatment. © 2010 International Clinical Cytometry Society.
Copyright © 2010 International Clinical Cytometry Society.20533388
P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction in the diagnosis and follow up of immunotherapy of wasp venom allergy.
Verweij Marjoke M, De Knop Kathleen J, Bridts Chris H, De Clerck Luc S, Stevens Wim J, Ebo Didier G
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) is known to govern IgE-mediated basophil activation. Intracellular phosphorylated p38 MAPK (Pp38 MAPK) in IgE-activated basophils can be quantified flow cytometrically.
To study whether Pp38 MAPK constitutes a potential novel read-out for flow-assisted diagnosis of hymenoptera venom allergy and to investigate whether this marker allows follow-up of successful venom immunotherapy (VIT).
Fifty-two patients with documented wasp venom allergy and seven wasp-stung asymptomatic control individuals were enrolled. Wasp venom-induced basophil activation was analyzed flow cytometrically with anti-IgE, anti-CD63, and anti-Pp38 MAPK to assess their activation status before starting immunotherapy. To assess whether p38 MAPK constitutes a candidate marker for monitoring VIT, we repeated the basophil activation test (BAT) in 25 patients on the fifth day of a build-up immunotherapy. In addition, we investigated whether the Pp38 MAPK-based BAT could contribute in the decision of discontinuing VIT in a cross-sectional analysis in 13 patients receiving treatment for 3 years and 14 patients receiving treatment for 5 years.
Patients exhibited a dose-dependent basophil activation with phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and upregulation of downstream CD63. In contrast, stung controls demonstrated a dose-dependent but "abrogated" signal transduction in basophils with less and shorter duration of the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and without subsequent upregulation of CD63. When repeated after 5 days of VIT and when investigated cross-sectionally after 3 years or 5 years of maintenance therapy, no effect of VIT on the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK was demonstrable.
This study discloses that not only basophils from patients, but also from the stung control individuals, respond to wasp venom stimulation with phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, although to a lesser extend. No clear effect of VIT on the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK was shown. Thus, although p38 MAPK provides an additional tool in the diagnosis of wasp venom allergy, it does not contribute to the decision whether to stop successful VIT. © 2010 International Clinical Cytometry Society.
Copyright © 2010 International Clinical Cytometry Society.20528883
Immunoglobulin G-dependent changes in basophil allergen threshold sensitivity during birch pollen immunotherapy.
Lalek N, Kosnik M, Silar M, Korosec P
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
The effects of pollen immunotherapy on effector cells of allergic inflammation, such as mast cells and basophils, are poorly understood.
For this reason, we conducted an open study on basophil allergen threshold sensitivity during birch pollen immunotherapy.
Basophil sensitivity was measured by CD63 flow cytometry in 14 patients with moderate-severe intermittent birch pollen rhinitis using four log allergen concentrations. In nine patients, we analysed the basophil sensitivity before and during treatment with subcutaneous birch immunotherapy (perennial scheme with allergoid). We also included eight birch-allergic donor subjects for IgG inhibition experiments and eight control subjects.
There was a decrease in basophil allergen threshold sensitivity after 2, 3, and 5 months of immunotherapy. This decrease was correlated with an improvement in patients' symptoms measured on a visual analogue scale. The serum obtained after immunotherapy induced a significant decrease in allergen threshold sensitivity in donor birch-allergic basophils. This inhibition was not observed after IgG depletion from the serum.
In this study, we showed that birch immunotherapy-induced IgG antibodies are associated with a reduction in basophil allergen threshold sensitivity. Further studies are needed to show whether the changes in basophil sensitivity are of clinical relevance in pollen immunotherapy.20515926
Coxiella burnetii phase I and II variants replicate with similar kinetics in degradative phagolysosome-like compartments of human macrophages.
Howe Dale, Shannon Jeffrey G, Winfree Seth, Dorward David W, Heinzen Robert A
Infection and immunity
Coxiella burnetii infects mononuclear phagocytes, where it directs biogenesis of a vacuolar niche termed the parasitophorous vacuole (PV). Owing to its lumenal pH (approximately 5) and fusion with endolysosomal vesicles, the PV is considered phagolysosome-like. However, the degradative properties of the mature PV are unknown, and there are conflicting reports on the maturation state and growth permissiveness of PV harboring virulent phase I or avirulent phase II C. burnetii variants in human mononuclear phagocytes. Here, we employed infection of primary human monocyte-derived macrophages (HMDMs) and THP-1 cells as host cells to directly compare the PV maturation kinetics and pathogen growth in cells infected with the Nine Mile phase I variant (NMI) or phase II variant (NMII) of C. burnetii. In both cell types, phase variants replicated with similar kinetics, achieving roughly 2 to 3 log units of growth before they reached stationary phase. HMDMs infected by either phase variant secreted similar amounts of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha. In infected THP-1 cells, equal percentages of NMI and NMII PVs decorate with the early endosomal marker Rab5, the late endosomal/lysosomal markers Rab7 and CD63, and the lysosomal marker cathepsin D at early (8 h) and late (72 h) time points postinfection (p.i.). Mature PVs (2 to 4 days p.i.) harboring NMI or NMII contained proteolytically active cathepsins and quickly degraded Escherichia coli. These data suggest that C. burnetii does not actively inhibit phagolysosome function as a survival mechanism. Instead, NMI and NMII resist degradation to replicate in indistinguishable digestive PVs that fully mature through the endolysosomal pathway.20507624
High gene expression of inflammatory markers and IL-17A correlates with severity of injection site reactions of Atlantic salmon vaccinated with oil-adjuvanted vaccines.
Mutoloki Stephen, Cooper Glenn A, Marjara Inderjit S, Koop Ben F, Evensen Øystein
BMC genomics
Two decades after the introduction of oil-based vaccines in the control of bacterial and viral diseases in farmed salmonids, the mechanisms of induced side effects manifested as intra-abdominal granulomas remain unresolved. Side effects have been associated with generation of auto-antibodies and autoimmunity but the underlying profile of inflammatory and immune response has not been characterized. This study was undertaken with the aim to elucidate the inflammatory and immune mechanisms of granuloma formation at gene expression level associated with high and low side effect (granuloma) indices.Groups of Atlantic salmon parr were injected intraperitoneally with oil-adjuvanted vaccines containing either high or low concentrations of Aeromonas salmonicida or Moritella viscosa antigens in order to induce polarized (severe and mild) granulomatous reactions. The established granulomatous reactions were confirmed by gross and histological methods at 3 months post vaccination when responses were known to have matured. The corresponding gene expression patterns in the head kidneys were profiled using salmonid cDNA microarrays followed by validation by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). qPCR was also used to examine the expression of additional genes known to be important in the adaptive immune response.
Granulomatous lesions were observed in all vaccinated fish. The presence of severe granulomas was associated with a profile of up-regulation of innate immunity-related genes such as complement factors C1q and C6, mannose binding protein, lysozyme C, C-type lectin receptor, CD209, Cathepsin D, CD63, LECT-2, CC chemokine and metallothionein. In addition, TGF-beta (p = 0.001), IL-17A (p = 0.007) and its receptor (IL-17AR) (p = 0.009) representing TH17 were significantly up-regulated in the group with severe granulomas as were arginase and IgM. None of the genes directly reflective of T(H)1 T cell lineage (IFN-gamma, CD4) or T(H)2 (GATA-3) responses were differentially expressed.
Granulomatous reactions following vaccination with oil-based vaccines in Atlantic salmon have the profile of strong expression of genes related to innate immune responses. The expression of TGF-beta, IL-17A and its receptor suggests an involvement of T(H)17 T cell lineage and is in conformity with strong infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages into inflamed areas. Arginase upregulation shows that macrophages in these reactions are alternatively activated, indicating also a T(H)2-profile. To what extent the expression of IL-17A and its receptor reflects an autoimmune vaccine-based reaction remains elusive but would be in conformity with previous observations of autoimmune reactions in salmon when vaccinated with oil-based vaccines.20500085
Quantification of Anisakis simplex allergens in fresh, long-term frozen, and cooked fish muscle.
Rodríguez-Mahillo Ana Isabel, González-Muñoz Miguel, de las Heras Cristina, Tejada Margarita, Moneo Ignacio
Foodborne pathogens and disease
Fish-borne parasitic zoonoses such as Anisakiasis were once limited to people living in countries where raw or undercooked fish is traditionally consumed. Nowadays, several factors, such as the growing international markets, the improved transportation systems, the population movements, and the expansion of ethnic ways of cooking in developed countries, have increased the population exposed to these parasites. Improved diagnosis technology and a better knowledge of the symptoms by clinicians have increased the Anisakiasis cases worldwide. Dietary recommendations to Anisakis-sensitized patients include the consumption of frozen or well-cooked fish, but these probably do not defend sensitized patients from allergen exposure. The aim of our work was to develop a sensitive and specific method to detect and quantify Anisakis simplex allergens in fish muscle and its derivatives. Protein extraction was made in saline buffer followed by preparation under acid conditions. A. simplex antigens were detected by IgG immunoblot and quantified by dot blot. The allergenic properties of the extracts were assessed by IgE immunoblotting and basophil activation test. We were able to detect less than 1 ppm of A. simplex antigens, among them the allergen Ani s 4, in fish muscle with no cross-reactions and with a recovery rate of 82.5%. A. simplex antigens were detected in hakes and anchovies but not in sardines, red mullets, or shellfish. We detected A. simplex allergens in cooked hakes and also in hake stock. We proved that A. simplex allergens are preserved in long-term frozen storage (-20 degrees C +/- 2 degrees C for 11 months) of parasitized hakes. Basophil activation tests have proven the capability of the A. simplex-positive fish extracts to induce allergic symptoms.20461965
Basophil activation can predict clinical sensitivity in patients after venom immunotherapy.
Kucera P, Cvackova M, Hulikova K, Juzova O, Pachl J
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
At present, no reliable in vitro test is available to monitor the success of specific venom immunotherapy (VIT) in preventing insect venom anaphylaxis. We investigated usefulness of the basophil activation test (BAT) in predicting the outcome of sting challenge in bee venom-allergic patients after VIT.
Twenty-one patients with bee venom anaphylaxis at the end of VIT and 6 control participants were enrolled. BAT (flow-cytometric evaluation of allergen-induced expression of CD63), skin testing, and specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E determination were performed prior to sting challenge.
Five of the 21 patients (23.8%) reacted to sting challenge. At a bee venom concentration of 100 ng/mL, the mean proportion of basophils expressing CD63 was 56% in reactors and 13.2% in nonreactors (P = .0321). Four of the 5 reactors had positive results and 14 of the 16 nonreactors had negative results. Thus, using 18.4% and 21.6% (receiver operating characteristic curve analysis) as the cutoff for expression of the CD63 marker, the positive and the negative predictive values were 67% and 93%, respectively, and specificity and sensitivity for BAT were 80% and 83%, respectively. However, at a concentration of 1000 ng/mL, no significant differences in basophil activation were observed between reactors and nonreactors.
We found BAT to be a helpful tool in predicting the clinical sensitivity of bee venom-allergic patients after VIT (correlation between BAT at submaximal venom concentration and sting challenge).20456708
In vitro cell quality of buffy coat platelets in additive solution treated with pathogen reduction technology.
Ostrowski Sisse R, Bochsen Louise, Salado-Jimena José A, Ullum Henrik, Reynaerts Inge, Goodrich Raymond P, Johansson Pär I
Transfusion
Pathogen reduction technologies (PRTs) may induce storage lesion in platelet (PLT) concentrates. To investigate this, buffy coat PLTs (BCPs) in PLT additive solution (AS; SSP+) with or without Mirasol PRT (CaridianBCT Biotechnologies) were assessed by quality control tests and four-color flow cytometry.
In vitro comparison of PRT and control pooled-and-split BCPs after 2, 3, 6, 7, and 8 days of storage was made. PLT concentration, count per unit, swirl, metabolism, activation (CD62P, PAC1, CD42b/GPIb, CD63, CD40L/CD154, CD40, annexin V), and microparticle, sCD40L, and sCD62P release were evaluated.
PRT induced a minor initial PLT loss (Day 2 [mean±SD], 302×10(9) ±44×10(9) PLTs/unit vs. 325× 10(9) ±46×10(9) PLTs/unit; p<0.001) but the decline was comparable to control BCP. Swirling was comparable and declined with similar rates in PRT-treated and control BCPs during storage. PRT enhanced PLT metabolism and activation, evidenced by lower pH(22) ; increased glucose consumption and lactate production rates (p<0.01); early increases in CD62P-, PAC1-, CD63-, CD40L-, CD40-, and annexin V-positive PLTs; reduced GPIb expression; and enhanced release of PLT-derived MPs and sCD40L (all p<0.05). CD62P and PAC1 expression changed with different kinetics during storage and varying GPIb expression was displayed within the CD62P/PAC1-positive PLT subsets.
PRT treatment of BCP in AS induced a minor initial PLT loss and enhanced metabolism and PLT activation. The clinical relevance for PLT function in vivo of these findings will be investigated in a clinical trial.
© 2010 American Association of Blood Banks.20447677
Podocyte membrane vesicles in urine originate from tip vesiculation of podocyte microvilli.
Hara Masanori, Yanagihara Toshio, Hirayama Yoshiaki, Ogasawara Shinya, Kurosawa Hiroyuki, Sekine Sakari, Kihara Itaru
Human pathology
Podocyte injury is involved in both the onset and progression of glomerular diseases. Our previous studies revealed that apical cell membranes of podocyte are shed into urine sediment and that urinary podocalyxin is a useful biomarker of podocyte injury. In this study, we examined the origin of urinary podocalyxin. Urine samples and kidney specimens from healthy children (n = 126) and patients with glomerular diseases (n = 77) were analyzed by immunohistologic methods. Immunofluorescence studies demonstrated that urinary podocalyxin was shed as granular structures into both the urine sediment and supernatant. Large amounts of podocalyxin were shed into both the urine sediment (17.2 +/- 3.2 ng/mg creatinine) and the supernatant (172.6 +/- 24.6 ng/mg creatinine) of patients, compared with the small amounts of urinary podocalyxin in healthy controls (sediment, 0.5 +/- 0.1 ng/mg creatinine; supernatant, 24.3 +/- 3.5 ng/mg creatinine). Electron and immunoelectron microscopic examinations showed that podocalyxin-positive vesicles in the sediment (125.6 +/- 8.8 nm) and the supernatant (121.2 +/- 6.4 nm) were similar in size to podocyte microvilli in biopsy specimens (123.6 +/- 8.9 nm), differentiating them from the much smaller urine exosomes (30-80 nm in diameter). Urine podocalyxin-positive vesicles tested negative in immunofluorescence microscopy on both exosomal markers CD24 and CD63. Podocalyxin-positive vesicles also tested negative for cytoskeletal markers, and electron microscopic examination revealed tip vesiculation of microvilli. We conclude that human urinary apical cell membrane vesicles appear to originate not from podocyte exosomes but from tip vesiculation of glomerular podocyte microvilli.
Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.20419159
The RING-CH ligase K5 antagonizes restriction of KSHV and HIV-1 particle release by mediating ubiquitin-dependent endosomal degradation of tetherin.
Pardieu Claire, Vigan Raphaël, Wilson Sam J, Calvi Alessandra, Zang Trinity, Bieniasz Paul, Kellam Paul, Towers Greg J, Neil Stuart J D
PLoS pathogens
Tetherin (CD317/BST2) is an interferon-induced membrane protein that inhibits the release of diverse enveloped viral particles. Several mammalian viruses have evolved countermeasures that inactivate tetherin, with the prototype being the HIV-1 Vpu protein. Here we show that the human herpesvirus Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is sensitive to tetherin restriction and its activity is counteracted by the KSHV encoded RING-CH E3 ubiquitin ligase K5. Tetherin expression in KSHV-infected cells inhibits viral particle release, as does depletion of K5 protein using RNA interference. K5 induces a species-specific downregulation of human tetherin from the cell surface followed by its endosomal degradation. We show that K5 targets a single lysine (K18) in the cytoplasmic tail of tetherin for ubiquitination, leading to relocalization of tetherin to CD63-positive endosomal compartments. Tetherin degradation is dependent on ESCRT-mediated endosomal sorting, but does not require a tyrosine-based sorting signal in the tetherin cytoplasmic tail. Importantly, we also show that the ability of K5 to substitute for Vpu in HIV-1 release is entirely dependent on K18 and the RING-CH domain of K5. By contrast, while Vpu induces ubiquitination of tetherin cytoplasmic tail lysine residues, mutation of these positions has no effect on its antagonism of tetherin function, and residual tetherin is associated with the trans-Golgi network (TGN) in Vpu-expressing cells. Taken together our results demonstrate that K5 is a mechanistically distinct viral countermeasure to tetherin-mediated restriction, and that herpesvirus particle release is sensitive to this mode of antiviral inhibition.20412314
Pilot study on basophil activation induced by contrast medium.
Böhm Ingrid, Speck Ulrich, Schild Hans H
Fundamental & clinical pharmacology
The purpose was to analyze the influence of both mono-/dimeric X-ray contrast media (CM) and immunological co-factors on basophil degranulation. The study has been conducted in 31 adult patients who received nonionic CM injection for enhanced routine computed tomography examination. Plasma histamine, and basophil degranulation by using CD63 expression and flow-cytometry in blood samples of patients receiving iotrolan or iopromide injections were analyzed in vivo and in vitro (with different stimuli) before and up to 24h after CM-injection. After iotrolan injection, histamine values remained unchanged and showed minimal increase after iopromide. In 5/12 patients receiving iopromide and in 5/19 in the iotrolan group histamine level rose (>100% of the baseline). After CM-injection, a significant activation of basophils (CD63) could be measured (P<0.05). IL-3 prestimulus revealed a more pronounced CD63 expression after iopromide than after iotrolan. The IL-1β prestimulus seemed to be dose-dependent. Patients showing the most marked CM-induced CD63 expression had the highest predose values after in vitro N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine treatment. Our finding suggests that increased histamine values and CD63 expression on basophils could depend on individual stimuli. Iopromide and iotrolan per se neither enhanced histamine release nor basophil degranulation under normal conditions. Analysis of CD63 expression by using fluorescence activated cell sorter-analysis is an interesting new tool to elucidate the complex conditions leading to CM-mediated hypersensitivity reactions.
© 2010 The Authors Fundamental and Clinical Pharmacology © 2010 Société Française de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.20390225
The majority of circulating platelet-derived microparticles fail to bind annexin V, lack phospholipid-dependent procoagulant activity and demonstrate greater expression of glycoprotein Ib.
Connor David Ewan, Exner Thomas, Ma David Dang Fung, Joseph Joanne Emily
Thrombosis and haemostasis
It has been widely accepted that microparticles expose phosphatidylserine which in turn binds annexin V. It was the objective of this study to compare the antigenic characteristics and phospholipid-dependent procoagulant activity of annexin V positive and -negative subpopulations of platelet-derived microparticles. Annexin V positive and -negative microparticles were identified and characterised using flow cytometry and procoagulant activity was measured by a phospholipid-dependent assay (XACT). In unstimulated platelet-poor plasma, 80% of platelet-derived microparticles failed to bind annexin V. Varying the assay constituents (buffer, calcium and annexin V concentration) did not alter annexin V binding. The proportion of microparticles that bound annexin V was dependent upon the agonist, with physiological agonists such as collagen resulting in fewer annexin V binding microparticles than non-physiological agonists such as ionophore. CD42b (glycoprotein Ib) expression was significantly decreased and CD62p and CD63 expression were significantly increased in annexin V positive compared to annexin V negative subpopulations. There was no significant difference in CD41, CD61, CD42a and CD40L expression between annexin V positive and -negative subpopulations. A significant correlation between annexin V binding and XACT was found (p=0.033). Annexin V inhibited greater than 95% of phospholipid activity, suggesting that annexin V binding was a true reflection of procoagulant activity. The majority of platelet-derived microparticles in unstimulated plasma failed to bind annexin V and showed significantly increased levels of CD42b compared to annexin V positive events. Phospholipid-dependent procoagulant activity is limited to the annexin V positive subpopulation and is agonist-dependent. The significance of annexin V negative microparticles is unclear, however, it is possible that they possess other activities aside from procoagulant phospholipid activity.20377117
Occupational rhinitis and asthma due to cabreuva wood dust.
Pala Gianni, Pignatti Patrizia, Perfetti Luca, Avanzini Maria Antonietta, Calcagno Gabriella, Preziosi Donatella, Moscato Gianna
Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology
20356458
CMTM5-v1, a four-transmembrane protein, presents a secreted form released via a vesicle-mediated secretory pathway.
Li Henan, Guo Xiaohuan, Shao Luning, Plate Markus, Mo Xiaoning, Wang Yu, Han Wenling
BMB reports
The CKLF-like MARVEL transmembrane domain-containing family (CMTM) is a novel family of proteins linking classical chemokines and the transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF). Our earlier studies indicated several CMTM members (such as CKLF1 and CMTM2) have a secreted form. This is the first report of the secreted form of CMTM5-v1, the major RNA splicing form of CMTM5, which is produced as small vesicles (100 nm diameter) and floats at a peak density of 1.19 g/ml on continuous sucrose gradients. CMTM5-v1 has no obvious co-localization with CD63 or Golgi complex. In addition, brefeldin A but not wortmannin can inhibit the secretion of CMTM5-v1. Our results suggest that CMTM5-v1 might be secreted via a different vesicle-mediated secretory pathway, which will be helpful for the studies of vesicle-mediated secretion and MARVEL domain-containing proteins.20352044
Mutations in CHMP2B in lower motor neuron predominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Cox Laura E, Ferraiuolo Laura, Goodall Emily F, Heath Paul R, Higginbottom Adrian, Mortiboys Heather, Hollinger Hannah C, Hartley Judith A, Brockington Alice, Burness Christine E, Morrison Karen E, Wharton Stephen B, Grierson Andrew J, Ince Paul G, Kirby Janine, Shaw Pamela J
PloS one
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a common late-onset neurodegenerative disease, is associated with fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) in 3-10% of patients. A mutation in CHMP2B was recently identified in a Danish pedigree with autosomal dominant FTD. Subsequently, two unrelated patients with familial ALS, one of whom also showed features of FTD, were shown to carry missense mutations in CHMP2B. The initial aim of this study was to determine whether mutations in CHMP2B contribute more broadly to ALS pathogenesis.
Sequencing of CHMP2B in 433 ALS cases from the North of England identified 4 cases carrying 3 missense mutations, including one novel mutation, p.Thr104Asn, none of which were present in 500 neurologically normal controls. Analysis of clinical and neuropathological data of these 4 cases showed a phenotype consistent with the lower motor neuron predominant (progressive muscular atrophy (PMA)) variant of ALS. Only one had a recognised family history of ALS and none had clinically apparent dementia. Microarray analysis of motor neurons from CHMP2B cases, compared to controls, showed a distinct gene expression signature with significant differential expression predicting disassembly of cell structure; increased calcium concentration in the ER lumen; decrease in the availability of ATP; down-regulation of the classical and p38 MAPK signalling pathways, reduction in autophagy initiation and a global repression of translation. Transfection of mutant CHMP2B into HEK-293 and COS-7 cells resulted in the formation of large cytoplasmic vacuoles, aberrant lysosomal localisation demonstrated by CD63 staining and impairment of autophagy indicated by increased levels of LC3-II protein. These changes were absent in control cells transfected with wild-type CHMP2B.
We conclude that in a population drawn from North of England pathogenic CHMP2B mutations are found in approximately 1% of cases of ALS and 10% of those with lower motor neuron predominant ALS. We provide a body of evidence indicating the likely pathogenicity of the reported gene alterations. However, absolute confirmation of pathogenicity requires further evidence, including documentation of familial transmission in ALS pedigrees which might be most fruitfully explored in cases with a LMN predominant phenotype.20337613
A granular variant of CD63 is a regulator of repeated human mast cell degranulation.
Schäfer Thorsten, Starkl P, Allard C, Wolf R M, Schweighoffer T
Allergy
Mast cells are secretory immune cells whose degranulation can provoke acute allergic reactions. It is presently unclear, however, whether an individual mast cell can repeatedly degranulate or turns dysfunctional after a single antigen stimulus. This work thus aims to better define the mast cell life cycle, with particular focus on new target structures for therapeutic or diagnostic approaches in allergy.
Monoclonal antibodies were raised against degranulated cord blood-derived human mast cells. A subset of these antibodies that exclusively recognized degranulated mast cells, but did not cross-react with quiescent mast cells or other hematopoietic cell types, became key reagents in subsequent experiments.
We identified a granular variant of tetraspanin CD63 as an exclusive molecular marker of degranulated human mast cells. Mutant analyses indicate that a cysteine cluster around residue C170 and protein glycosylation at residue N172 account for the antibody specificity. Here, we show that mast cells, which underwent an initial FcεRI-mediated degranulation, can be degranulated for at least another cycle in vitro. Repeated degranulation, however, requires an IgE/antigen stimulus that differs from the preceding one. Furthermore, the new variant-specific anti-CD63 antibodies effectively impair repeated cycles of mast cell degranulation.
Our findings indicate that mast cells are stable, multiple-use cells, which are capable of surviving and delivering several consecutive hits. Surface expression of the novel CD63 variant is a distinguishing feature of such primed cells. Reagents directed against this molecular hallmark may thus become valuable diagnostic and therapeutic agents.20306989
Role of fine needle aspiration cytology, cell block preparation and CD63, P63 and CD56 immunostaining in classifying the specific tumor type of the lung.
Kim Dong Hoon, Kwon Mi Seon
Acta cytologica
To determine whether CD63, p63 and CD56 are useful in the diagnostic evaluation of cytologic samples of pulmonary malignancy.
We explored the utility of using a panel of 3 antibodies, CD63, p63 and CD56, for the diagnosis of lung cancer in cytologic samples consisting of 40 cases of cell block sections and previously Papanicolaou-stained cytologic smear slides.
The positive rates for CD63, p63 and CD56 were as follows: adenocarcinoma (18/19), (0/19), (0/19), for small cell lung carcinoma (3/8), (0/8), (8/8), and for squamous cell carcinoma (0/13), (12/13), (0/13). All p63 positive cases were squamous cell carcinoma, and all CD56 positive cases were small cell lung carcinoma. CD63 was positive in the majority of adenocarcinomas.
The panel of CD63, p63 and CD56 appears to be useful in the diagnostic evaluation of cytologic samples of pulmonary malignancy.20305399
The in vitro effects of Xancor, a synthetic astaxanthine derivative, on hemostatic biomarkers in aspirin-naïve and aspirin-treated subjects with multiple risk factors for vascular disease.
Serebruany Victor, Malinin Alex, Goodin Thomas, Pashkow Fredric
American journal of therapeutics
Astaxanthine is a polar carotenoid metabolite derived from a proprietary prodrug, Xancor, which aligns parallel with the membrane phospholipids exhibiting potent antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and cell protective properties, although the precise mechanism of action is unknown. This prodrug is currently under development for hepatic, neurologic, and vascular disease indications. Considering established links between heart disease and stroke with platelets, coagulation cascade, and fibrinolysis, the aim of the study was to assess the effect of asthaxantine on human biomarkers of hemostasis. The rationale was to test a hypothesis that the drug may diminish activation of hemostasis, making it a potentially attractive addition to treat patients with vascular disease. In vitro effects of whole blood preincubation with escalating concentrations of asthaxantine (0.3 microM, 1 microM, 3 microM, 10 microM, 30 microM, and 100 microM) were assessed from 12 aspirin-naïve and eight aspirin-treated volunteers with multiple risk factors for vascular disease. A total of 25 biomarkers were measured, of which 12 were related to platelet function, 10 to coagulation, and three to fibrinolysis. Platelet aggregation induced by ADP, collagen, and arachidonic acid and expression of CD31, CD41, GP IIb/IIIa, CD51/61, P-selectin, CD63, CD107a, CD151+CD14, and CD154 were not affected. Coagulation indices such as aPTT, prothrombin time, thrombin time, fibrinogen, antithrombin III (antigen and activity), Protein C, Protein S (free and activity), and von Willebrand factor remained unchanged after incubation with astaxanthine. Fibrinolytic activity biomarkers such as plasminogen, D-dimer, and FDP were also not affected after in vitro pretreatment of blood samples with astaxanthine. In the projected subclinical (less than 1 microM), therapeutic (3 microM to 30 microM), and supratherapeutic concentration (100 microM), astaxanthine in vitro does not affect platelet, coagulation, or fibrinolytic indices in either aspirin-naïve or aspirin-treated subjects. These results are important for the assessment of the safety profile, but remain to be confirmed preclinically, in vivo, and ultimately in the clinic.20236428
Differential recruitment of CD63 and Rab7-interacting-lysosomal-protein to phagosomes containing Mycobacterium tuberculosis in macrophages.
Seto Shintaro, Matsumoto Sohkichi, Tsujimura Kunio, Koide Yukio
Microbiology and immunology
M.tb is an intracellular pathogen which survives within the phagosomes of host macrophages by inhibiting their fusion with lysosomes. Here, it has been demonstrated that a lysosomal glycoprotein, CD63, is recruited to the majority of M.tb phagosomes, while RILP shows limited localization. This is consistent with the author's findings that CD63, but not RILP, is recruited to the phagosomes in macrophages expressing the dominant negative form of Rab7. These results suggest that M.tb phagosomes selectively fuse with endosomes and lysosomes to escape killing activity while acquiring nutrients.20218655
Structural-mechanical characterization of nanoparticle exosomes in human saliva, using correlative AFM, FESEM, and force spectroscopy.
Sharma Shivani, Rasool Haider I, Palanisamy Viswanathan, Mathisen Cliff, Schmidt Michael, Wong David T, Gimzewski James K
ACS nano
All living systems contain naturally occurring nanoparticles with unique structural, biochemical, and mechanical characteristics. Specifically, human saliva exosomes secreted by normal cells into saliva via exocytosis are novel biomarkers showing tumor-antigen enrichment during oral cancer. Here we show the substructure of single human saliva exosomes, using a new ultrasensitive low force atomic force microscopy (AFM) exhibiting substructural organization unresolvable in electron microscopy. We correlate the data with field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and AFM images to interpret the nanoscale structures of exosomes under varying forces. Single exosomes reveal reversible mechanical deformation displaying distinct elastic, 70-100 nm trilobed membrane with substructures carrying specific transmembrane receptors. Further, we imaged and investigated, using force spectroscopy with antiCD63 IgG functionalized AFM tips, highly specific and sensitive detection of antigenCD63, potentially useful cancer markers on individual exosomes. The quantitative nanoscale morphological, biomechanical, and surface biomolecular properties of single saliva exosomes are critical for the applications of exosomes for cancer diagnosis and as a model for developing new cell delivery systems.20216102
Metastatic potential of melanoma cells is not affected by electrochemotherapy.
Todorovic Vesna, Sersa Gregor, Mlakar Vid, Glavac Damjan, Flisar Karel, Cemazar Maja
Melanoma research
Electrochemotherapy is a local treatment combining chemotherapy and application of electric pulses to the tumour. Electrochemotherapy with bleomycin and cisplatin has shown its effectiveness in controlling local tumour growth in the treatment of malignant melanoma. However, the effect of electrochemotherapy on the metastatic potential of tumour cells is not known. Prevention of metastasis is an important aspect of successful treatment; however, it is known that metastasis can be induced by different treatment modalities. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of electrochemotherapy with cisplatin on the metastatic potential of human malignant melanoma cells. Cells treated by electrochemotherapy with cisplatin were tested for their ability to migrate and invade through Matrigel-coated porous membrane. In addition, RNA was isolated from cells after treatment and differentially expressed genes were investigated by microarray analysis to evaluate the effect of electrochemotherapy with cisplatin on gene expression. There were no significant changes observed in cell migration and invasion of melanoma cells after electrochemotherapy. In addition, there were no changes observed in cell adhesion on Matrigel. Gene expression analysis showed that a very low number of genes were differentially expressed after electrochemotherapy with cisplatin. Two genes, LAMB3 and CD63 involved in cell migration, were both downregulated after electrochemotherapy with cisplatin and the expression of metastasis promoting genes was not increased after electrochemotherapy. Our data suggest that electrochemotherapy does not increase the metastatic behaviour of human melanoma cells.20175889
In vitro and in vivo characterization of highly purified human mesothelioma derived cells.
Melotti Alice, Daga Antonio, Marubbi Daniela, Zunino Annalisa, Mutti Luciano, Corte Giorgio
BMC cancer
Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a rare disease known to be resistant to conventional therapies. A better understanding of mesothelioma biology may provide the rationale for new therapeutic strategies. In this regard, tumor cell lines development has been an important tool to study the biological properties of many tumors. However all the cell lines established so far were grown in medium containing at least 10% serum, and it has been shown that primary cell lines cultured under these conditions lose their ability to differentiate, acquire gene expression profiles that differ from that of tissue specific stem cells or the primary tumor they derive from, and in some cases are neither clonogenic nor tumorigenic. Our work was aimed to establish from fresh human pleural mesothelioma samples cell cultures maintaining tumorigenic properties.
The primary cell cultures, obtained from four human pleural mesotheliomas, were expanded in vitro in a low serum proliferation-permissive medium and the expression of different markers as well as the tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mice was evaluated.
The established mesothelioma cell cultures are able to engraft, after pseudo orthotopic intraperitoneal transplantation, in immunodeficient mouse and maintain this ability to after serial transplantation. Our cell cultures were strongly positive for CD46, CD47, CD56 and CD63 and were also strongly positive for some markers never described before in mesothelioma cell lines, including CD55, CD90 and CD99. By real time PCR we found that our cell lines expressed high mRNA levels of typical mesothelioma markers as mesothelin (MSLN) and calretinin (CALB2), and of BMI-1, a stemness marker, and DKK1, a potent Wingless [WNT] inhibitor.
These cell cultures may provide a valuable in vitro and in vivo model to investigate mesothelioma biology. The identification of new mesothelioma markers may be useful for diagnosis and/or prognosis of this neoplasia as well as for isolation of mesothelioma tumor initiating cells.20159259
CD203c expression on human basophils is associated with asthma exacerbation.
Ono Emiko, Taniguchi Masami, Higashi Noritaka, Mita Haruhisa, Kajiwara Keiichi, Yamaguchi Hiromichi, Tatsuno Sayaka, Fukutomi Yuma, Tanimoto Hidenori, Sekiya Kiyoshi, Oshikata Chiyako, Tsuburai Takahiro, Tsurikisawa Naomi, Otomo Mamoru, Maeda Yuji, Hasegawa Maki, Miyazaki Eishi, Kumamoto Toshihide, Akiyama Kazuo
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
CD203c is a basophil cell surface marker used to diagnose and monitor various allergic diseases, but its relationship to asthma is not clear.
We determined whether CD203c expression levels are associated with stable and exacerbated asthma.
We used flow cytometry to compare spontaneous expression levels of surface markers on basophils from patients with stable or exacerbated asthma and from healthy subjects. Longitudinal changes in these expression levels were measured after basophil stimulation by IgE-dependent or IgE-independent mechanisms and compared with patients' asthma status.
Spontaneous expression levels of CD203c were significantly higher on basophils from patients with asthma exacerbation than patients with stable asthma or healthy subjects. In contrast, no differences in spontaneous expression levels of CD63 or CD69 were observed among the 3 groups. Anti-IgE-induced expression of CD203c significantly increased in basophils during asthma exacerbation (P = .005). Low concentrations of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus or IL-3 induced higher expression levels of CD203c during asthma exacerbation than during clinical improvement; induction of CD203c expression by these antigens therefore correlates with asthma control. In the patients with clinical improvement, there was a correlation between spontaneous CD203c expression levels and the percent predicted values of FEV(1) (r = -0.761; P = .022).
Asthma exacerbation was accompanied by increased expression of CD203c on basophils that decreased significantly during remission. Basophil expression levels of CD203c might therefore be used to monitor asthma in patients.
Copyright 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.20158902
Basophil sensitivity through CD63 or CD203c is a functional measure for specific immunotherapy.
Mikkelsen Susan, Bibby Bo Martin, Dolberg Mette Konow Bøgebjerg, Dahl Ronald, Hoffmann Hans Jürgen
Clinical and molecular allergy : CMA
Subcutaneous Immunotherapy (SCIT) modifies the allergic response and relieves allergic symptoms. SCIT is the only and a very effective treatment for insect venom allergy. We hypothesized that basophil sensitivity, measured through the basophil activation test, would decrease during SCIT up dosing. Expression of CD203c was compared to CD63 as marker for basophil activation, using a Bland Altman plot and ROC curves.
Patients (n = 18) starting subcutaneous SCIT for wasp allergy with an up dosing scheme of 7 to 11 weeks were enrolled. Heparinised blood samples were drawn at weeks 1-4, 7 and at the first maintenance visit. Basophils were stimulated at 7 log dilutions of V. vespula allergen for 15 min, and were stained with CD203c and CD63. Basophils were identified as CD203c+ leukocytes, and the proportion of CD63+ and CD203c+ cells were plotted against allergen concentration. A sigmoid curve was fitted to the points, and the allergen concentration at which half of the maximal activation was achieved, LC50, was calculated. In another series of experiments, LC50 calculated in whole blood (AP) was subtracted from LC50 calculated with basophils suspended in plasma from a nonatopic donor (HS) to determine the protective effect of soluble factors in blood of patients treated with SCIT.
Heparin blood basophil activation was similar through CD63 and CD203c. Basophils were significantly more sensitized three weeks after initiation of SCIT compared to baseline (p < 0,01). The difference in LC50 increased by 1,04 LC50 units (p = 0,04) in patients that had just achieved maintenance dose compared with patients before initiating SCIT. When maintenance allergen concentrations had been reached, an increase in the protective plasma component was documented. Blood basophil concentration was marginally reduced by SCIT.
Basophil activation is a versatile and sensitive tool that measures changes in the humoral immune response to allergen during SCIT.20150644
Evaluation of the prognostic value of CD44 in glioblastoma multiforme.
Wei Kuo-Chen, Huang Chiung-Yin, Chen Pin-Yuan, Feng Li-Ying, Wu Tai-Wei Erich, Chen Shu-Mei, Tsai Hong-Chieh, Lu Yu-Jen, Tsang Ngan-Ming, Tseng Chen-Kan, Pai Ping-Ching, Shin Jyh-Wei
Anticancer research
Glioblastoma and astrocytoma are the most common brain tumors affecting adults 45-60 years of age. The poor prognosis for glioblastoma patients results from recurrence after treatment. There is therefore an urgent need to develop diagnostic and prognostic markers as well as new therapies.
Microarray analyses of clinical specimens from glioblastoma patients were used to identify potential tumor markers. Expression of candidate genes was analyzed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and by immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry.
Five potential markers (CD44 antigen (CD44), growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, alpha (GADD45A), fibronectin 1 (FN1), CD63 antigen (CD63) and secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1)) showed expression patterns that correlated significantly with malignant glioma. In particular, expression of the CD44 antigen was elevated in more severe tumor types, and higher in tumor cores than in peripheral regions. However, lower levels of CD44 expression surprisingly correlated with lower survival.
The CD44 antigen is a promising candidate for further development as a prognostic and therapeutic tool.20129176
Basophil models of homeopathy: a sceptical view.
Ennis Madeleine
Homeopathy : the journal of the Faculty of Homeopathy
This paper examines the activation and inhibition of activation of human basophils. After a brief description of human basophils, different methods to determine basophil activation are discussed with a special emphasis on the use of flow cytometric methods, as these circumvent the potential problems of assays based on the loss of colour by activated basophils. The activation of human basophils by ultra-high dilutions of anti-IgE is discussed. The majority of the paper describes the inhibition of basophil activation by ultra-high dilutions of histamine. The results from published papers are described and discussed. After over 20 years research trying to find out if high dilutions of histamine have a negative feedback effect on the activation of basophils by anti-IgE, what do we know? The methods are poorly standardized between laboratories - although the same is true for conventional studies. Certainly there appears to be some evidence for an effect - albeit small in some cases - with the high dilutions in several different laboratories using the flow cytometric methodologies. After standardization of a number of parameters, it is recommended that a multi-centre trial be performed to hopefully put an end to this "never-ending story".
Copyright 2009 The Faculty of Homeopathy. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.20128421
A new variant of the basophil activation test for allergen-induced basophil CD63 upregulation. The effect of cetirizine.
Wolanczyk-Medrala A, Gogolewski G, Liebhart J, Gomulka K, Litwa M, Panaszek B, Lindner K, Medrala W
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
The aim of our study was to determine the diagnostic usefulness of a newly developed basophil activation test (BAT) in patients allergic to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and pollens. We also analyzed the influence of cetirizine on CD63 upregulation. This popular antihistamine strongly inhibits skin tests, but its impact on BAT sensitivity remains unknown and deserves at least preliminary determination.
The study sample comprised 22 patients allergic to house dust mite and pollens and 19 healthy controls. All participants underwent skin prick testing and the newly developed flow-cytometric basophil activation test. The protocol for allergen-induced basophil CD63 upregulation consisted of whole blood samples that were processed and stained with anti-CCR3/CD63 antibodies added to the buffer at the beginning of stimulation. Skin prick tests and BAT were performed twice--before and 2 hours after ingestion of 10 mg of cetirizine.
The new BAT is characterized by its short processing time, easy basophil gating, and strong CD63 upregulation with very high sensitivity and excellent specificity. Our results suggest that allergen-induced CD63 upregulation by higher doses of allergens is not inhibited 2 hours after administration of cetirizine (unlike skin prick tests).
The BAT is a very useful and precise method for the diagnosis of allergy to aeroallergens. It is not influenced by cetirizine.20118909
Expression of the tetraspanins CD9, CD37, CD63, and CD151 in Merkel cell carcinoma: strong evidence for a posttranscriptional fine-tuning of CD9 gene expression.
Woegerbauer Markus, Thurnher Dietmar, Houben Roland, Pammer Johannes, Kloimstein Philipp, Heiduschka Gregor, Petzelbauer Peter, Erovic Boban M
Modern pathology : an official journal of the United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology, Inc
Tetraspanins including CD9, CD37, CD63, and CD151 are linked to cellular adhesion, cell differentiation, migration, carcinogenesis, and tumor progression. The aim of the study was to detect, quantify, and evaluate the prognostic value of these tetraspanins in Merkel cell carcinoma and to study the regulation of CD9 mRNA expression in Merkel cell carcinoma cell lines in detail. Immunohistochemical staining of 28 Merkel cell carcinoma specimens from 25 patients showed a significant correlation of CD9 (P=0.03) and CD151 (P=0.043) expression to overall survival. CD9 and CD63 expression correlated significantly to patients' disease-free interval (P=0.017 and P=0.058). Of primary Merkel cell carcinoma tumors, 42% were CD9 positive in contrast to only 21% of the subcutaneous in-transit metastases. Characterization of the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the CD9 mRNA from two cultured Merkel cell carcinoma cell lines revealed the presence of two major RNA species differing only in the length of their 5' termini (183 versus 102 nucleotides). In silico analysis of the long CD9 mRNA predicted a 5' UTR folding pattern blocking ribosomal scanning and translation. Quantitative data by real-time RT-PCR not only indicated a reduction of CD9 mRNA but also a distinct quantitative shift toward the long 5' UTR in CD9 receptor negative cells. These observations provide an example for a posttranscriptional fine-tuning of CD9 gene expression in tumor cells.20103766
Induction of neutrophil degranulation by S100A9 via a MAPK-dependent mechanism.
Simard Jean-Christophe, Girard Denis, Tessier Philippe A
Journal of leukocyte biology
S100A9 is a proinflammatory protein, expressed abundantly in the cytosol of neutrophils and monocytes. High extracellular S100A9 concentrations have been correlated with chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease, as well as with phagocyte extravasation. This study tested the hypothesis that S100A9 induces degranulation in human neutrophils. S100A9 was found to up-regulate the surface expression of CD35 and CD66b, proteins contained in secretory vesicles and specific/gelatinase granules, respectively. In addition, gelatinase and albumin, stored, respectively, in specific/gelatinase granules and secretory vesicles, were detected in the supernatants of neutrophils stimulated with S100A9. In contrast, stimulation with S100A9 had no effect on CD63 expression or MPO secretion, two proteins contained in azurophilic granules. S100A9 induced the phosphorylation of the MAPKs, ERK1/2, p38, and JNK. Inhibition of p38 and JNK but not ERK1/2, with specific inhibitors (SB203580, JNKII, and PD98059, respectively), blocked neutrophil degranulation induced by S100A9. Taken together, these results support the hypothesis and clearly indicate that S100A9 induces the degranulation of secretory and specific/gelatinase granules but not of azurophilic granules in a process involving p38 and JNK and further support its classification as a DAMP.20085600
Immunotherapy with a modified birch pollen extract in allergic rhinoconjunctivitis: clinical and immunological effects.
Ceuppens J L, Bullens D, Kleinjans H, van der Werf J, None None
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Modification of allergens by glutaraldehyde in extracts used for immunotherapy reduces the risk for side-effects, but the therapeutic efficacy of such extracts still requires further evaluation. The aim of this study was to show the efficacy and safety of immunotherapy with a single-strength glutaraldehyde-modified aluminium hydroxide-adsorbed extract of birch pollen.
In a multi-centre, randomized, placebo-controlled double-blind setting, starting in 2001 between 1 August and 15 December, birch pollen-allergic subjects (n=62) were injected subcutaneously with increasing doses of the allergen extract or placebo at weekly intervals over a 6-week period (or longer if adverse reactions occurred). Maintenance dose was given monthly for at least 18 months till June 2003. Efficacy was evaluated on the basis of the clinical index score (CIS), a combined symptom and medication score.
Fifty-eight patients could be evaluated for clinical efficacy. Treatment with the birch pollen extract resulted in a lower CIS for the eye and nose during the peak birch pollen season of 2003, compared with placebo (reductions of 42% and 31%, respectively) (P=0.017 and 0.039). Active treatment induced IgG and IgG4 antibodies reacting with Bet v 1 (P<0.001). Sera from treated patients had a blocking effect on Bet v 1-induced basophil activation (P<0.04). No major adverse reactions occurred, and local reactions, if occurring, were mild.
Immunotherapy with a modified slow-release birch pollen extract, administered in a single-strength preparation with a rapid dose increase, is safe and efficacious. IgG and IgG4 antibodies against native Bet v 1 are induced, which block basophil activation.20082712
Prehospital resuscitation with hypertonic saline-dextran modulates inflammatory, coagulation and endothelial activation marker profiles in severe traumatic brain injured patients.
Rhind Shawn G, Crnko Naomi T, Baker Andrew J, Morrison Laurie J, Shek Pang N, Scarpelini Sandro, Rizoli Sandro B
Journal of neuroinflammation
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) initiates interrelated inflammatory and coagulation cascades characterized by wide-spread cellular activation, induction of leukocyte and endothelial cell adhesion molecules and release of soluble pro/antiinflammatory cytokines and thrombotic mediators. Resuscitative care is focused on optimizing cerebral perfusion and reducing secondary injury processes. Hypertonic saline is an effective osmotherapeutic agent for the treatment of intracranial hypertension and has immunomodulatory properties that may confer neuroprotection. This study examined the impact of hypertonic fluids on inflammatory/coagulation cascades in isolated head injury.
Using a prospective, randomized controlled trial we investigated the impact of prehospital resuscitation of severe TBI (GCS < 8) patients using 7.5% hypertonic saline in combination with 6% dextran-70 (HSD) vs 0.9% normal saline (NS), on selected cellular and soluble inflammatory/coagulation markers. Serial blood samples were drawn from 65 patients (30 HSD, 35 NS) at the time of hospital admission and at 12, 24, and 48-h post-resuscitation. Flow cytometry was used to analyze leukocyte cell-surface adhesion (CD62L, CD11b) and degranulation (CD63, CD66b) molecules. Circulating concentrations of soluble (s)L- and sE-selectins (sL-, sE-selectins), vascular and intercellular adhesion molecules (sVCAM-1, sICAM-1), pro/antiinflammatory cytokines [tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin (IL-10)], tissue factor (sTF), thrombomodulin (sTM) and D-dimers (D-D) were assessed by enzyme immunoassay. Twenty-five healthy subjects were studied as a control group.
TBI provoked marked alterations in a majority of the inflammatory/coagulation markers assessed in all patients. Relative to control, NS patients showed up to a 2-fold higher surface expression of CD62L, CD11b and CD66b on polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) and monocytes that persisted for 48-h. HSD blunted the expression of these cell-surface activation/adhesion molecules at all time-points to levels approaching control values. Admission concentrations of endothelial-derived sVCAM-1 and sE-selectin were generally reduced in HSD patients. Circulating sL-selectin levels were significantly elevated at 12 and 48, but not 24 h post-resuscitation with HSD. TNF-alpha and IL-10 levels were elevated above control throughout the study period in all patients, but were reduced in HSD patients. Plasma sTF and D-D levels were also significantly lower in HSD patients, whereas sTM levels remained at control levels.
These findings support an important modulatory role of HSD resuscitation in attenuating the upregulation of leukocyte/endothelial cell proinflammatory/prothrombotic mediators, which may help ameliorate secondary brain injury after TBI.
NCT00878631.20082620
A new basophil activation test using CD63 and CCR3 in allergy to antibiotics.
Eberlein B, León Suárez I, Darsow U, Ruëff F, Behrendt H, Ring J
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Flow cytometric basophil activation tests (BAT) have been developed as cellular tests for in vitro diagnosis of IgE-mediated reactions. Different markers and techniques have been used after stimulation with various allergens.
It was the aim of the present study to compare an established BAT (Flow-CAST) with a newly developed basophil activation protocol using CD63 and CCR3 (Flow2 CAST) in patients with type-I allergy to antibiotics.
Twenty-four patients with a history of type-I allergy to antibiotics were examined. A careful allergy history was taken, and skin tests and determination of specific IgE antibodies were performed. Two different BAT using CD63 expression but different protocols were carried out after stimulation with different concentrations of antibiotics. Fifteen healthy subjects without a history of antibiotic allergy were studied as controls.
The Flow2 CAST showed a higher sensitivity than the Flow-CAST (55% vs. 53%) with regard to patients' history. Specificity was 80% both for the Flow2 CAST and for the Flow-CAST with regard to controls with negative history and negative RAST.
These results show the value of two different BAT as cellular tests in the in vitro diagnosis of patients with antibiotic allergy with equal specificity and a slightly higher sensitivity for the Flow2 CAST.20060356
Downregulation of CD9 protein expression is associated with aggressive behavior of oral squamous cell carcinoma.
Buim Marcilei Eliza Cavicchioli, Lourenço Silvia Vanessa, Carvalho Kátia Candido, Cardim Roberta, Pereira Cláudia, Carvalho André Lopes, Fregnani José Humberto, Soares Fernando Augusto
Oral oncology
Squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity (OSCC) is a malignancy characterized by a high degree of local aggression and metastasis to cervical lymph nodes. Tetraspanins are proteins with functional roles in a wide array of cellular processes and are reported to be associated with tumor progression. The present study investigated the expression of the CD9, CD37, CD63, CD81 and CD82 tetraspanins in OSCC using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and quantitative Real Time-PCR (qRT-PCR). Tissue microarray (TMA) analysis of samples from 179 cases of OSCC and 10 normal samples oral mucosa were evaluated immunomorphologically. We analyzed CD9 and CD82 expression by qRT-PCR in 66 OSCC cases and 4 normal samples of oral mucosa. Expression of CD63, CD37 and CD81 was not detected in the samples studied. CD82 was downregulated or negative in 127 of 179 (80%) specimens; no correlation was observed between CD82 expression, clinicopathological parameters, disease-free survival and 5-year overall survival. CD9 expression was downregulated or negative in 75 of 129 (42%) OSCC samples. Loss of CD9 expression in OSCC samples correlated with the incidence of lymph node metastasis (p=0.017). Disease-free survival and the 5-year overall survival of patients with downregulated or negative CD9 expression were significantly lower than in patients with positive CD9 expression (p=0.010 and p=0.071, respectively). No correlation was found between CD9 or CD82 expression and clinicopathological parameters by qRT-PCR. Our results suggest that the downregulation or lack of expression of the CD9 protein might indicate a more aggressive of OSCC.
(c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.20054683
Vacuolar ATPase-mediated sequestration of local anesthetics in swollen macroautophagosomes.
Bawolak Marie-Thérèse, Morissette Guillaume, Marceau François
Canadian journal of anaesthesia = Journal canadien d'anesthésie
Local anesthetics in their therapeutic concentration range cause a vacuolar cytopathology that has been observed in vivo and in various types of mammalian cells. We examined whether active concentration ranges of drugs and the kinetics of the vacuolar response are clinically relevant and whether this phenomenon is associated with cytotoxicity, autophagy, and cell stress signalling.
We compared procaine and lidocaine for morphological, functional, and signalling responses in a previously exploited non-neuronal system, primary smooth muscle cells. Several markers conjugated to fluorescent proteins allowed morphological and functional analysis of vacuolar cells. Signalling related to autophagy and cell stress was addressed (immunoblotting of cell lysates).
Within 2-4 hr, lidocaine and procaine (> or = 1 mM) induced massive cell vacuolization, a response abated by the V-ATPase inhibitor, bafilomycin A1, and activated macroautophagic signalling (LC3 II formation) but not other stress signalling (p38, ERK1/2, p53, no influence on serum-controlled Akt phosphorylation). Novel aspects of the morphological analysis include reduced LC3 labelling of the large vacuoles in cells treated with 3-methyl-adenine, inhibition of CD63 labelling of these vacuoles by co-expression of dominant negative Rab7, retention of secretory green fluorescent protein (GFP) possessing a signal sequence in vacuolar cells, and partial vacuole labelling with lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1). Lidocaine (2.5-5 mM) was not overtly cytotoxic but arrested cell division over 48 hr.
V-ATPase-mediated sequestration of clinically relevant concentrations of local anesthetics sequentially involves vacuolization, macroautophagic signalling, and lysosome fusion to large vacuoles. Disruption of the secretory pathway and mitotic arrest were also observed over several hours without major cytotoxicity.20052414
Nanostructural and transcriptomic analyses of human saliva derived exosomes.
Palanisamy Viswanathan, Sharma Shivani, Deshpande Amit, Zhou Hui, Gimzewski James, Wong David T
PloS one
Exosomes, derived from endocytic membrane vesicles are thought to participate in cell-cell communication and protein and RNA delivery. They are ubiquitous in most body fluids (breast milk, saliva, blood, urine, malignant ascites, amniotic, bronchoalveolar lavage, and synovial fluids). In particular, exosomes secreted in human saliva contain proteins and nucleic acids that could be exploited for diagnostic purposes. To investigate this potential use, we isolated exosomes from human saliva and characterized their structural and transcriptome contents.
Exosomes were purified by differential ultracentrifugation and identified by immunoelectron microscopy (EM), flow cytometry, and Western blot with CD63 and Alix antibodies. We then described the morphology, shape, size distribution, and density using atomic force microscopy (AFM). Microarray analysis revealed that 509 mRNA core transcripts are relatively stable and present in the exosomes. Exosomal mRNA stability was determined by detergent lysis with RNase A treatment. In vitro, fluorescently labeled saliva exosomes could communicate with human keratinocytes, transferring their genetic information to human oral keratinocytes to alter gene expression at a new location.
Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that exosomes shuttle RNA between cells and that the RNAs present in the exosomes may be a possible resource for disease diagnostics.20051054
Removal by adsorbent beads of biological response modifiers released from platelets, accumulated during storage, and potentially associated with platelet transfusion reactions.
Tanaka Shigenori, Hayashi Tomoya, Tani Yoshihiko, Hirayama Fumiya
Transfusion
Recent studies have demonstrated that biological response modifiers (BRMs) released from platelets (PLTs) during storage may have a clinical significance in PLT transfusion reactions. Washing PLTs and partial substitution of plasma with artificial solutions reduce transfusion reactions, but the washing procedure is time-consuming, and partial plasma substitution is not sufficient to completely eliminate transfusion reactions.
This study determined the levels of three BRMs: soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L); regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed, and secreted (RANTES, CCL5); and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1). These BRMs were released from PLTs during storage up to Day 10. To selectively remove these BRMs, four types of cellulose beads were investigated. The levels of these three BRMs in plasma derived from PLT concentrates (PCs) stored for 10 days or in PCs stored for 5 days were determined after treatment with or without each adsorbent bead for 3 hours.
These three BRMs accumulated in proportion to the storage duration. The 3-hour treatment with cellulose beads possessing sulfate ester groups (A) or phosphate ester groups (B) effectively removed sCD40L and RANTES and partly removed TGF-beta1. In addition, although PLT activation was minimally induced, PLT counts decreased by approximately 13% to 30%, after these treatments.
This study revealed that Cellulose Beads A or B are effective in removing the three BRMs that accumulate during PLT storage. Additional in vitro assays and in vivo studies are required to evaluate whether this method is effective in reducing transfusion reactions.20029169
Novel method to process cystic fibrosis sputum for determination of oxidative state.
Hector A, Jonas F, Kappler M, Feilcke M, Hartl D, Griese M
Respiration; international review of thoracic diseases
Induced sputum is the most commonly used method to analyze airway inflammation in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients ex vivo. Due to the complex matrix of the sample material, precise and reliable analysis of sputum constituents depends critically on preanalytical issues.
Here we compared the commonly used method for sputum processing by dithiothreitol (DTT) with a novel mechanical method in regard to basal cellular parameters, neutrophil markers and glutathione (GSH) levels.
Sputum samples from CF patients were processed in parallel with or without the use of DTT. The key improvement of the mechanical method was the processing in many very small aliquots. Cellular and humoral markers were assessed and compared according to Bland-Altman.
Total cell count, cell viability, differential cell count, neutrophil elastase levels and flow cytometrically analyzed neutrophil markers (CD63, CD11b, DHR) did not differ between the two methods. Intracellular and extracellular GSH levels were significantly higher in DTT-treated samples (p = 0.002).
The mechanical sputum-processing method presented had a similar yield of cells and fluids as the conventional DTT method and the advantage of omitting the introduction of reducing agents. This method allows a more reliable analysis of redox-dependent airway inflammation in sputum cells and fluid from CF patients than methods utilizing DTT.
Copyright © 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.20019814
BCA2/Rabring7 promotes tetherin-dependent HIV-1 restriction.
Miyakawa Kei, Ryo Akihide, Murakami Tsutomu, Ohba Kenji, Yamaoka Shoji, Fukuda Mitsunori, Guatelli John, Yamamoto Naoki
PLoS pathogens
Host cell factors can either positively or negatively regulate the assembly and egress of HIV-1 particles from infected cells. Recent reports have identified a previously uncharacterized transmembrane protein, tetherin/CD317/BST-2, as a crucial host restriction factor that acts during a late budding step in HIV-1 replication by inhibiting viral particle release. Although tetherin has been shown to promote the retention of nascent viral particles on the host cell surface, the precise molecular mechanisms that occur during and after these tethering events remain largely unknown. We here report that a RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase, BCA2 (Breast cancer-associated gene 2; also called Rabring7, ZNF364 or RNF115), is a novel tetherin-interacting host protein that facilitates the restriction of HIV-1 particle production in tetherin-positive cells. The expression of human BCA2 in "tetherin-positive" HeLa, but not in "tetherin-negative" HOS cells, resulted in a strong restriction of HIV-1 particle production. Upon the expression of tetherin in HOS cells, BCA2 was capable of inhibiting viral particle production as in HeLa cells. The targeted depletion of endogenous BCA2 by RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells reduced the intracellular accumulation of viral particles, which were nevertheless retained on the plasma membrane. BCA2 was also found to facilitate the internalization of HIV-1 virions into CD63(+) intracellular vesicles leading to their lysosomal degradation. These results indicate that BCA2 accelerates the internalization and degradation of viral particles following their tethering to the cell surface and is a co-factor or enhancer for the tetherin-dependent restriction of HIV-1 release from infected cells.20018626
Cytohesin-1 regulates the Arf6-phospholipase D signaling axis in human neutrophils: impact on superoxide anion production and secretion.
El Azreq Mohammed-Amine, Garceau Valérie, Harbour Danielle, Pivot-Pajot Christophe, Bourgoin Sylvain G
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) stimulation with fMLP stimulates small G proteins such as ADP-ribosylation factors (Arfs) Arf1 and Arf6, leading to phospholipase D (PLD) activation and functions such as degranulation and the oxidative burst. However, the molecular links between fMLF receptors and PLD remain unclear. PMNs express cytohesin-1, an Arf-guanine exchange factor that activates Arfs, and its expression is strongly induced during the acquisition of the neutrophilic phenotype by neutrophil-like cells. The role of cytohesin-1 in the activation of the fMLF-Arf-PLD signaling axis, and the accomplishment of superoxide anion production, and degranulation was investigated in PMNs using the selective inhibitor of cytohesin, Sec 7 inhibitor H3 (secinH3). Cytohesin-1 inhibition with secinH3 leads to Arf6 but not Arf1 inhibition, demonstrating the specificity for Arf6, and fMLF-mediated activation of PLD and of the oxidative burst as well. We observed a decrease in fMLF-mediated protein secretion and expression of cell surface markers corresponding to primary (CD63/myeloperoxidase), secondary (CD66/lactoferrin), and tertiary (matrix metalloproteinase-9) granules in PMNs incubated with secinH3. Similarly, silencing cytohesin-1 or Arf6 in PLB-985 cells negatively affected fMLF-induced activation of PLD, superoxide production, and expression of granule markers on the cell surface. In contrast, stable overexpression of cytohesin-1 in PLB-985 cells enhanced fMLF-induced activation of Arf6, PLD, and NADPH oxidase. The results of this study provide evidence for an involvement of cytohesin-1 in the regulation of the functional responses of human PMNs and link these events, in part at least, to the activation of Arf6.20013029
Use of lipid rafting for the analysis of human basophil activation by flow cytometry.
Sainte-Laudy Jean, Ouk Catherine
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
Human leukocyte activation induced by specific and non-specific stimuli is characterized by the formation of lipid rafts defined as lipid-ordered domains that are more tightly packed than the surrounding non-raft phase of the bilayer. These lipid rafts are formed in parallel with profound membrane reorganization.
Analyse the rafting and non-rafting proteins present on the activated and resting basophil membrane and study their interest for the flow cytometric analysis of basophil activation.
Human basophils obtained from samples used for diagnostic cellular tests such as basophil or lymphocyte activation tests were stimulated either by the formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine peptide (fMLP), by an anti-IgE or by an allergen. After 40 min at 37 degrees C, they were labelled by different antibodies conjugated to fluorescent dyes as an anti-IgE FITC, an anti-CCR3 PE, an anti-CD63, an anti-CD203c PE, an anti-11b, annexin V FITC or by cholera toxin FITC. Moreover, several experiments were analysed using an Amnis cytometer, allowing one to obtain the picture of the analysed cells.
Anti-IgE or specific allergen elicits a membrane neo expression of CD63 at a high density and is poorly represented on resting basophil membrane. Upon an IgE-dependant activation some of the markers already present on resting basophil membrane, as CD203c, are up regulated and others, such as the IgE/IgE FcepsilonRI receptor and CCR3 are down regulated and submitted to the formation of clusters demonstrated by the pictures taken with the Amnis cytometer. For non-IgE dependant activators, such as fMLP, the picture was different since IgE was not down regulated, whereas CCR3 was down regulated. As demonstrated using annexin V or the cholera toxin used for analysing apoptosis, these phenomenon were paralleled by the formation of lipid rafts, gangliosides domains, such as GM1, which is accessible from the extra cellular medium.
Basophil activation leads to membrane events close to the apoptosis phenomenon. The flow cytometric analysis of these membrane events may lead to protocols for allergen-induced activation and, may significantly increase cellular test sensitivity, particularly for drugs allergy diagnosis for which the usual protocols, such as those using CD63 alone, are insufficiently sensitive.20012525
The roles of tetraspanins in HIV-1 replication.
Thali Markus
Current topics in microbiology and immunology
Tetraspanins are small integral membrane proteins that are known to control a variety of cellular processes, including signaling, migration and cell-cell fusion. Research over the past few years established that they are also regulators of various steps in the HIV-1 replication cycle, but the mechanisms through which these proteins either enhance or repress virus spread remain largely unknown.20008537
Activation of platelets by Aspergillus fumigatus and potential role of platelets in the immunopathogenesis of Aspergillosis.
Rødland Ernst Kristian, Ueland Thor, Pedersen Turid M, Halvorsen Bente, Muller Fredrik, Aukrust Pål, Frøland Stig S
Infection and immunity
Aspergillus fumigatus is the most frequent cause of invasive mold infections worldwide. Platelets contribute to inflammation and promote thrombosis, characteristically seen in aspergillosis, and might be involved both in antifungal defense and in the histopathological process. In the experiments reported here, in vitro activation of platelets by conidia, swollen conidia, and hyphae from A. fumigatus was assessed by flow cytometry and enzyme immunoassays. THP-1 monocytes and human monocytes with and without platelets were cultured with hyphae from A. fumigatus, and the release of interleukin-8 (IL-8) was measured by enzyme immunoassays. A. fumigatus potently induced the expression of CD62-p and CD63 and the release of CD40 ligand, RANTES, and Dickkopf homolog 1 in platelets, with particularly enhancing effects of hyphae compared with conidia. The hypha-mediated activation of platelets further enhanced the release of IL-8 both in THP-1 monocytes and in human adherent monocytes. In conclusion, we have found that A. fumigatus is a potent inducer of platelet-mediated inflammation, potentially promoting protective as well as harmful responses during aspergillosis.20001954
Proteomic identification and characterization of secreted N-glycosylated NPC2 following cross-linking of the high-affinity receptor for IgE on mast cells.
Pathak Ashutosh K, Helm Birgit A
Cell biology international
Allergen-mediated cross-linking of the high-affinity receptor for IgE on mast cells triggers the release of diverse preformed and de novo synthesized immunoregulatory mediators that further the allergic response. A proteomic screen applied to the detection of proteins secreted by the model rat mast cell line, RBL-2H3 (rat basophilic leukaemia, subline 2H3.1), led to the identification of the cholesterol-binding glycoprotein, NPC2/RE1 (Niemann-Pick Type C2/epididymal secretory protein 1). Glycosylated NPC2 is secreted early in response to an IgE-mediated stimulus and co-localizes with the lysosomal membrane marker, CD63. NPC2 belongs to the ML (MD-2-related lipid-recognition) protein family (155 members), which includes the Toll-like receptor co-factors, MD-1 and MD-2, and perhaps most interestingly, seven major house dust mite allergens of unknown function (including Der p 2 and Der f 2). Possible role(s) for the protein in the allergic response and future applications of this approach are discussed.19961360
Rab36 regulates the spatial distribution of late endosomes and lysosomes through a similar mechanism to Rab34.
Chen Li, Hu Jingjie, Yun Ye, Wang Tuanlao
Molecular membrane biology
Small GTPase Rab36 is homologous to Rab34 with 56% amino acid sequence identity. Rab34 was characterized as a Golgi-associated Rab protein and regulates lysosomal positioning through interaction with RILP; however, the properties and functions of Rab36 have not been investigated. To investigate Rab36, we constructed EGFP-Rab36 wild type, the active GTP-bound mutant EGFP-Rab36Q116L and negative GDP-bound mutant EGFP-Rab36T71N. Expression of EGFP-Rab36 wild type revealed that Rab36 co-localized with Golgi markers GM130, Syntaxin 5 and TGN46 in Hela cells, indicating Rab36 is associated with Golgi apparatus. Over-expression of Rab36 induced late endosome and lysosome clustering around the Golgi apparatus, marked by LBPA, CD63, Lamp1 and Lamp2, without effects on early endosomal compartment marked by EEA1. GST-pulldown assay demonstrated that Rab36 can also interact with RILP. In addition, the binding region for Rab36 is in the C-terminal region (aa199-401) of RILP. Our data suggested that Rab36 may regulate the spatial distribution of late endosomes and lysosomes through a similar mechanism to Rab34.19949313
Regulation of haematopoietic progenitor cell proliferation and survival: The involvement of the osteoblast.
Woodward Julia
Cell adhesion & migration
Haematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) traffic between the circulation and the bone marrow. Through contact with osteoblasts in the bone marrow niche, their survival, maintenance and proliferation is regulated. This review summarizes recent observations regarding the interaction between osteoblasts and HPCs, and the resulting downstream effects on signaling and niche maintenance. Using live imaging, amongst other techniques, HPCs were found to make prolonged contact with the osteoblast, via a specialized region of their membrane with high expression of prominin 1, CD63 and rhodamine PE. Following contact, portions of the HPC membrane expressing these molecules were phagocytosed by the osteoblast into SARA-positive signaling-endosomes. In response, Smad signaling was downregulated in the osteoblasts, leading to increased production of SDF-1; a chemokine involved in progenitor cell homing to the bone marrow, and thus regulating progenitor cell trafficking. The study summarised here presents important findings regarding progenitor cell trafficking, maintenance, proliferation and survival in the bone marrow and potentially other niche microenvironments, following signaling events initiated and propagated through single cell interactions.19949097
The herpes simplex virus-1 encoded glycoprotein B diverts HLA-DR into the exosome pathway.
Temme Sebastian, Eis-Hübinger Anna M, McLellan Alexander D, Koch Norbert
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Neutralizing Abs play an important role for immunity against HSV-1 infection. This branch of the immune response is initiated by MHC class II Ag presentation and activation of T cell help. In this study, we show that the HSV-1 encoded glycoprotein B (gB) manipulates the class II processing pathway by perturbing endosomal sorting and trafficking of HLA-DR (DR) molecules. Expression of gB in the human melanoma cell line Mel JuSo results in formation of enlarged DR(+) intracellular vesicles. Costaining of the vesicles revealed the presence of DR, gB, and the late endosomal marker CD63. The lumen of these late endosomal membranes shows a variable content, containing either gB or CD63, or both CD63 and gB. gB targets DR molecules on their biosynthetic route, after the MHC class II invariant chain is released from the DR heterodimer. gB-DR complexes were detected in a post-Golgi compartment and in exosomes, but not on the cell surface. Interestingly, increasing expression of gB strongly elevated the amount of DR and CD63 released into the exosome pathway. In conclusion, this is a previously undescribed mode of viral immune evasion involving hijacking of DR from its normal transport route to the cell surface, followed by viral-mediated release of DR into the exosome pathway.19945674
Inhibition of basophil activation by histamine: a sensitive and reproducible model for the study of the biological activity of high dilutions.
Sainte-Laudy J, Belon Ph
Homeopathy : the journal of the Faculty of Homeopathy
At the beginning of this series of experiments we were looking for a model based on the use of purified commercially available compounds based on a fully described and accepted pharmacological model to study of the biological effect of high dilutions. Negative feedback induced by histamine, a major pro-inflammatory mediator, on basophils and mast cells activation via an H2 receptor me these criteria. The simplest way of measuring basophil activation in the early 1980's was the human basophil activation test (HBDT).
Our major goal was first to study the biological effect of centesimal histamine dilutions beyond the Avogadro limit, on the staining properties of human basophils activated by an allergen extract initially house dust mite, then an anti-IgE and N-formyl-Met-Leu-Phe (fMLP). Technical development over the 25 years of our work led us to replace the manual basophil counting by flow cytometry. The main advantages were automation and observer independence. Using this latter protocol our aim was to confirm the existence of this phenomenon and to check its specificity by testing, under the same conditions, inactive analogues of histamine and histamine antagonists. More recently, we developed an animal model (mouse basophils) to study the effect of histamine on histamine release.
For the HBDT model basophils were obtained by sedimentation of human blood taken on EDTA and stained with Alcian blue. Results were expressed in percentage activation. Histamine dilutions tested were freshly prepared in the lab by successive centesimal dilutions and vortexing. Water controls were prepared in the same way. For the flow cytometric protocol basophils were first labeled by an anti-IgE FITC (basophil marker) and an anti-CD63 (basophil activation marker). Results were expressed in percentage of CD63 positive basophils. Another flow cytometric protocol has been developed more recently, based on basophil labeling by anti-IgE FITC (fluorescein isothiocyanate) and anti-CD203 PE (another human basophil activation marker). Results were expressed in mean fluorescence intensity of the CD203c positive population (MFI-CD203c) and an activation index calculated by an algorithm. For the mouse basophil model, histamine was measured spectrofluorimetrically. The main results obtained over 28 years of work was the demonstration of a reproducible inhibition of human basophil activation by high dilutions of histamine, the effect peaks in the range of 15-17CH. The effect was not significant when histamine was replaced by histidine (a histamine precursor) or cimetidine (histamine H2 receptor antagonist) was added to the incubation medium. These results were confirmed by flow cytometry. Using the latter technique, we also showed that 4-Methyl histamine (H2 agonist) induced a similar effect, in contrast to 1-Methyl histamine, an inactive histamine metabolite. Using the mouse model, we showed that histamine high dilutions, in the same range of dilutions, inhibited histamine release.
Successively, using different models to study of human and murine basophil activation, we demonstrated that high dilutions of histamine, in the range of 15-17CH induce a reproducible biological effect. This phenomenon has been confirmed by a multi-center study using the HBDT model and by at least three independent laboratories by flow cytometry. The specificity of the observed effect was confirmed, versus the water controls at the same dilution level by the absence of biological activity of inactive compounds such as histidine and 1-Methyl histamine and by the reversibility of this effect in the presence of a histamine receptor H2 antagonist.19943839
Three tetraspanins from Chinese shrimp, Fenneropenaeus chinensis, may play important roles in WSSV infection.
Wang B, Li F, Xiang J, Gui L, Luo Z, Yan H
Journal of fish diseases
Three members of the tetraspanin/TM(4)SF superfamily were cloned from Chinese shrimp, Fenneropenaeus chinensis. The deduced amino acid sequences of the three proteins have typical motifs of the tetraspanin/TM(4)SF superfamily. Phylogenetic analysis of the proteins, together with the known tetraspanins of invertebrates and vertebrates, revealed that they belong to different tetraspanin subfamilies: CD9, CD63 and tetraspanin-3. The three cloned genes of CD9, CD63 and tetraspanin-3 showed apparently different tissue distributions. The CD9 gene (FcCD9) was specifically expressed in the hepatopancreas. While for the CD63 gene (FcCD63), the highest expression was detected in nerves, epidermis and heart, with low expression in haemocytes, ovary, gill, hepatopancreas and stomach and no expression in intestine, muscle and lymphoid organ. Compared with FcCD9 and FcCD63, the tetraspanin-3 gene (FcTetraspanin-3) was more broadly expressed and its highest expression was detected in the intestine. Its expression in nerves was lower than in the intestine, but was higher than in other tissues. Expression in haemocytes, ovary and muscle was much lower than in other tissues. The expression profiles of FcCD9, FcCD63 and FcTetraspanin-3 in different tissues, including haemocytes, lymphoid organ and hepatopancreas, were compared by real-time PCR when shrimp were challenged by live white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) and heat-inactivated WSSV. All three tetraspanins were markedly up-regulated in the live WSSV-challenged shrimp tissues. The data suggested that the three cloned members of TM(4)SF superfamily in Chinese shrimp may play a key role in the route of WSSV infection.19940501
Localization of DNA and RNA in eosinophil secretory granules.
Behzad Ali R, Walker David C, Abraham Thomas, McDonough John, Mahmudi-Azer Salahadin, Chu Fanny, Shaheen Furquan, Hogg James C, Paré Peter D
International archives of allergy and immunology
Although the accepted paradigm is that the proteins stored in eosinophil crystalloid granules are translated from messenger RNA transcribed in the cell nucleus, recent ultrastructural evidence suggests that protein synthesis may also take place within eosinophilic granules.
We used 2 different methods to detect the presence of DNA and RNA in eosinophil secretory granules. Using bromodeoxyuridine, a thymidine analogue, and bromouridine, a uracil analogue, we labeled the DNA and RNA in eosinophils in vivo in rabbits. Immunoelectron microscopy to localize these molecules was performed on ultrathin sections of blood and bone marrow eosinophils using monoclonal anti-bromodeoxyuridine antibody with IgG as a control. The immunogold grain density was measured in each subcellular compartment within the eosinophils and analyzed using image analysis software. A combination of DNA/CD63 immunofluorescence staining and a fluorescently labeled molecular probe that stains RNA was used to examine the presence of DNA and RNA in the secretory granules of human blood eosinophils.
The mean density of bromodeoxyuridine-labeled DNA and bromouridine-labeled RNA immunogold grains in the secretory granules of blood and bone marrow eosinophils were significantly higher (p < 0.0005) than cytoplasmic or background staining. We also demonstrated the existence of DNA and RNA in the CD63-positive secretory granules of human peripheral blood eosinophils by means of immunofluorescent staining and a fluorescently labeled molecular probe.
These results provide evidence that eosinophil granules are the site of DNA and RNA synthesis and suggest the potential for a new role(s) for eosinophil-secretory granules.
Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.19932763
A cytologic assay for diagnosis of food hypersensitivity in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Carroccio Antonio, Brusca Ignazio, Mansueto Pasquale, Pirrone Giuseppe, Barrale Maria, Di Prima Lidia, Ambrosiano Giuseppe, Iacono Giuseppe, Lospalluti Maria Letizia, La Chiusa Stella M, Di Fede Gaetana
Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association
A percentage of patients with symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) suffer from food hypersensitivity (FH) and improve on a food-elimination diet. No assays have satisfactory levels of sensitivity for identifying patients with FH. We evaluated the efficacy of an in vitro basophil activation assay in the diagnosis of FH in IBS-like patients.
Blood samples were collected from 120 consecutive patients diagnosed with IBS according to Rome II criteria. We analyzed in vitro activation of basophils by food allergens (based on levels of CD63 expression), as well as total and food-specific immunoglobulin (Ig)E levels in serum. Effects of elimination diets and double-blind food challenges were used as standards for FH diagnosis.
Twenty-four of the patients (20%) had FH (cow's milk and/or wheat hypersensitivity); their symptom scores improved significantly when they were placed on an elimination diet. Patients with FH differed from other IBS patients in that they had a longer duration of clinical history, a history of FH as children, and an increased frequency of self-reported FH; they also had hypersensitivities to other antigens (eg, egg or soy). The basophil activation assay diagnosed FH with 86% sensitivity, 88% specificity, and 87% accuracy; this level of sensitivity was significantly higher than that of serum total IgE or food-specific IgE assays.
A cytometric assay that quantifies basophils after stimulation with food antigens based on cell-surface expression of CD63 had high levels of sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in diagnosing FH. This assay might be used to diagnose FH in patients with IBS-like symptoms.
Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.19931001
Eyebrow papule in an elderly man.
Clark F Landon, Somoano Brian, Taube Janis, Egbert Barbara, Kim Jinah
Dermatology online journal
A 70-year-old Caucasian man presented with a several-month history of a solitary, asymptomatic papule on the left eyebrow. His medical history included stage 1A lentigo maligna melanoma and multiple non-melanoma skin cancers. Physical examination demonstrated a solitary 5-mm smooth, dome-shaped skin colored papule with subtle central erosion on the left eyebrow. No overlying telangiectasias were noted. A biopsy of the lesion was performed. The lesion was composed of plump spindle cells arranged in a plexiform pattern in the background of thick, keloidal collagen bundles. The lesional cells were NKI/C3-positive and S-100-negative. A diagnosis of cellular neurothekeoma was made.19903263
N-linked glycan-dependent interaction of CD63 with CXCR4 at the Golgi apparatus induces downregulation of CXCR4.
Yoshida Takeshi, Ebina Hirotaka, Koyanagi Yoshio
Microbiology and immunology
Efficient downregulation of CXCR4 cell surface expression by introduction of the CD63 gene has previously been reported by us. In the present study, it was found that CD63 and its mutant efficiently interact with CXCR4 in live cells and that CD63-induced downregulation and interaction are significantly abrogated by the N-linked glycosylation inhibitor, TM. Furthermore, the downregulation and interaction were clearly attenuated by alternation of all three N-linked glycosylation sites in CD63. Either CD63 or CD63DeltaN formed a complex with CXCR4 at the Golgi apparatus and the late endosomes, while CD63 GD mutants lost the ability to form a complex with CXCR4 exclusively at the Golgi apparatus. These findings suggest that CD63 interacts with CXCR4 through the N-linked glycans-portion of the CD63 protein and that the complex induces direction of CXCR4 trafficking to the endosomes/lysosomes, rather than to the plasma membrane. At the Golgi apparatus, there may be lysosome protein (CD63)-associated machinery that influences trafficking of other membrane proteins.19901060
Tetraspanin CD81 is required for Listeria monocytogenes invasion.
Tham To Nam, Gouin Edith, Rubinstein Eric, Boucheix Claude, Cossart Pascale, Pizarro-Cerda Javier
Infection and immunity
Listeria monocytogenes is an intracellular bacterial pathogen that invades epithelial cells by subverting two cellular receptors, E-cadherin and Met. We recently identified type II phosphatidylinositol 4-kinases alpha and beta (PI4KIIalpha and PI4KIIbeta) as being required for bacterial entry downstream of Met. In this work, we investigated whether tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD81, which figure among the few described molecular partners of PI4KIIalpha, function as molecular adaptors recruiting PI4KIIalpha to the bacterial entry site. We observed by fluorescence microscopy that CD9, CD63, and CD81 are expressed and detected at the cellular surface and also within intracellular compartments, particularly in the case of CD63. In resting cells, colocalization of tetraspanins and PI4KIIalpha is detectable only in restricted areas of the perinuclear region. Upon infection with Listeria, endogenous CD9, CD63, and CD81 were recruited to the bacterial entry site but did not colocalize strictly with endogenous PI4KIIalpha. Live-cell imaging confirmed that tetraspanins and PI4KIIalpha do not follow the same recruitment dynamics to the Listeria entry site. Depletion of CD9, CD63, and CD81 levels by small interfering RNA demonstrated that CD81 is required for bacterial internalization, identifying for the first time a role for a member of the tetraspanin family in the entry of Listeria into target cells. Moreover, depletion of CD81 inhibits the recruitment of PI4KIIalpha but not that of the Met receptor to the bacterial entry site, suggesting that CD81 may act as a membrane organizer required for the integrity of signaling events occurring at Listeria entry sites.19894777
Strategies for targeting tetraspanin proteins: potential therapeutic applications in microbial infections.
Hassuna Noha, Monk Peter N, Moseley Gregory W, Partridge Lynda J
BioDrugs : clinical immunotherapeutics, biopharmaceuticals and gene therapy
The identification of novel targets and strategies for therapy of microbial infections is an area of intensive research due to the failure of conventional vaccines or antibiotics to combat both newly emerging diseases (e.g. viruses such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and new influenza strains, and antibiotic-resistant bacteria) and entrenched, pandemic diseases exemplified by HIV. One clear approach to this problem is to target processes of the host organism rather than the microbe. Recent data have indicated that members of the tetraspanin superfamily, proteins with a widespread distribution in eukaryotic organisms and 33 members in humans, may provide such an approach. Tetraspanins traverse the membrane four times, but are distinguished from other four-pass membrane proteins by the presence of conserved charged residues in the transmembrane domains and a defining 'signature' motif in the larger of the two extracellular domains (the EC2). They characteristically form promiscuous associations with one another and with other membrane proteins and lipids to generate a specialized type of microdomain: the tetraspanin-enriched microdomain (TEM). TEMs are integral to the main role of tetraspanins as 'molecular organizers' involved in functions such as membrane trafficking, cell-cell fusion, motility, and signaling. Increasing evidence demonstrates that tetraspanins are used by intracellular pathogens as a means of entering and replicating within human cells. Although previous investigations focused mainly on viruses such as hepatitis C and HIV, it is now becoming clear that other microbes associate with tetraspanins, using TEMs as a 'gateway' to infection. In this article we review the properties and functions of tetraspanins/TEMs that are relevant to infective processes and discuss the accumulating evidence that shows how different pathogens exploit these properties in infection and in the pathogenesis of disease. We then investigate the novel and exciting possibilities of targeting tetraspanins for the treatment of infectious disease, using specific antibodies, recombinant EC2 domains, small-molecule mimetics, and small interfering RNA. Such therapies, directed at host-cell molecules, may provide alternative options for combating fast-mutating or newly emerging pathogens, where conventional approaches face difficulties.19888988
Human cytomegalovirus final envelopment on membranes containing both trans-Golgi network and endosomal markers.
Cepeda Victoria, Esteban Mariano, Fraile-Ramos Alberto
Cellular microbiology
The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has been shown to complete its final envelopment on cytoplasmic membranes prior to its secretion to the extracellular medium. However, the nature of these membranes has not been characterized. It is thought that HCMV acquires its final envelope from the trans-Golgi network (TGN), though we and others have previously reported a role for endocytic membranes. Here we studied the localization of cellular markers in HCMV-infected cells and in isolated viruses. Immunofluorescence staining indicated that HCMV induces the recruitment of TGN and endosomal markers to the virus factory. Immuno-gold labelling of isolated viral particles and electron microscopy demonstrated the incorporation of TGN46, endosomal markers early endosomal antigen 1, annexin I, transferrin receptor and CD63, and the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor, which traffics between the TGN and endosomes into the viral envelope. Virus immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that virions containing TGN46 and CD63 were infectious. This study reconciles the apparent controversy regarding the nature of the HCMV assembly site and suggests that HCMV has the ability to generate a novel membrane compartment containing markers for both TGN and endosomes, or that the membranes that HCMV uses for its envelope may be vesicles in transit between the TGN and endosomes.19887118
Stimulus-specific regulation of CD63 and CD203c membrane expression in human basophils by the flavonoid quercetin.
Chirumbolo S, Conforti A, Ortolani R, Vella A, Marzotto M, Bellavite P
International immunopharmacology
Flavonoids, such as quercetin, were reported to inhibit histamine release and cytokine production by basophils, but there is no evidence describing their action on membrane markers and intracellular biochemical pathways.
The aim of the study was to examine the effect of several quercetin doses on an in vitro human basophil activation system that evaluates up-regulation of membrane markers in response to agonists.
Leukocyte buffy coats from K(2)-EDTA anti-coagulated blood were treated with different concentrations of quercetin and triggered with anti-IgE ("allergy model") and with N-formyl-Met-Leu-Phe (fMLP) ("inflammation model"). Basophils were captured as CD123(bright)/HLA-DR(non-expressing) cells in a flow cytometry analysis and fluorescence values of CD63-FITC, CD203c-PE and CD123-PECy5 were used to produce dose response curves.
Quercetin at a dose of 10 microg/ml strongly inhibited CD63 and CD203c membrane up-regulation triggered by both agonists, but it neither affected cell viability nor changed the expression of the phenotypic marker CD123. The anti-IgE model appeared highly sensitive to the effect of quercetin: a dose as low as 0.01 microg/ml was able to significantly decrease CD63 and CD203c membrane expression. In the fMLP model the dose response was different: quercetin doses from 0.01 to 0.1 microg/ml significantly increased up-regulation of membrane markers, achieving the highest effect with CD63.
Very low doses of quercetin, within the pharmacological range, inhibit IgE-mediated membrane marker's up-regulation but prime the response to the chemotactic peptide fMLP; this stimulus specificity may have implications on the possible therapeutic action of the flavonoid in different pathologies.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.19885843
Cysteine proteinase inhibitor Act d 4 is a functional allergen contributing to the clinical symptoms of kiwifruit allergy.
Popovic Milica M, Milovanovic Mina, Burazer Lidija, Vuckovic Olga, Hoffmann-Sommergruber Karin, Knulst Andre C, Lindner Buko, Petersen Arnd, Jankov Ratko, Gavrovic-Jankulovic Marija
Molecular nutrition & food research
Kiwifruit has become a frequent cause of fruit allergy in the recent years. The molecular basis of type I hypersensitivity to kiwifruit is attributed to 11 IUIS allergens, with Act d 1, Act d 2 and Act d 5 characterized in extenso. Evaluation of the allergenic properties of Act d 4, a cysteine proteinase inhibitor from green kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa) was performed in this study. Identity of the purified glycoprotein was determined by Edman degradation and by mass fingerprint whereby more than 90% of the primary structure of the mature kiwifruit cystatin was confirmed. Using MALDI TOF analysis, molecular masses of 10902.5 and 11055.2 Da were detected for Act d 4, respectively. Positive skin prick reactivity with Act d 4 was induced in three kiwifruit allergic patients, as well as the upregulation of CD63 and CD203c molecules in the basophile activation assay. The IgE reactivity was detected in dot blot analysis while Western blot analysis was negative using sera from six kiwifruit patients, suggesting the presence of conformational IgE epitopes on the Act d 4 molecule. As activator of effector cells in type I hypersensitivity Act d 4 is a functional allergen contributing to the clinical symptoms of kiwifruit allergy.19874355
Usefulness of the CD63 basophil activation test in detecting Anisakis hypersensitivity in patients with chronic urticaria: diagnosis and follow-up.
Frezzolini A, Cadoni S, De Pità O
Clinical and experimental dermatology
The basophil activation test (BAT) has been recently described as a useful in vitro tool for diagnosis of allergy to Anisakis species in patients with acute urticaria.
To evaluate the relationship between sensitization to Anisakis simplex and chronic urticaria (CU), using flow cytometry analysis of in vitro BAT. Methods.  A. simplex sensitization was evaluated in patients with CU (n = 57) and in atopic (n = 22) and healthy controls (n = 20) by means of skin prick test (SPT), specific IgE and Anisakis-induced BAT using a triple-labelled strategy with anti-CD123, anti-human leucocyte antigen DR and anti-CD63 antibodies. During a follow-up period of 6 months in 10 patients with CU who accepted a fish-free dietary regimen, the diagnostic performance of the in vivo and in vitro methods was calculated, and changes in specific IgE and BAT were evaluated with respect to clinical response.
A significant association between CU and A. simplex sensitization was found, with an overall prevalence of 75.4% in patients with CU (43/57) compared with 18% (4/22) and 10% (2/20) of the atopic and healthy controls, respectively (P < 0.0001). BAT (cut-off > 13%) had the highest sensitivity and specificity, with significantly better ability than specific IgE testing for the identification of A. simplex sensitization in patients with CU. During the 6-month follow-up, clinical improvement was seen in all patients, and specific IgE and BAT results decreased to normal values in 6/10 (60%) and 10/10 (100%) patients, respectively.
BAT can be considered a reliable new in vitro method to evaluate A. simplex hypersensitivity in patients with CU, supplementing standardized procedures in both diagnosis and follow-up.
© 2009 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2009 British Association of Dermatologists.19860818
Midostaurin (PKC412) inhibits immunoglobulin E-dependent activation and mediator release in human blood basophils and mast cells.
Krauth M-T, Mirkina I, Herrmann H, Baumgartner C, Kneidinger M, Valent P
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
KIT tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), such as nilotinib or midostaurin (PKC412), are increasingly used in clinical trials to counteract neoplastic cell growth in patients with aggressive mast cell (MC) disorders. However, these patients suffer not only from MC infiltration and consecutive organ damage but also from MC mediator-related symptoms.
We examined the effects of three KIT TKI, imatinib, nilotinib, and midostaurin, on IgE-dependent mediator release in normal human blood basophils and cultured cord blood cell-derived MC, and on spontaneous histamine secretion in the MC leukaemia cell line HMC-1 and the basophil cell line KU812.
The multi-kinase inhibitor midostaurin that interacts with KIT and protein kinase C was found to counteract anti-IgE-induced mediator release in blood basophils and cultured cord blood cell-derived MC in all samples examined. By contrast, no effects of imatinib or nilotinib on histamine secretion in basophils or MC were found. The effects of midostaurin on histamine release were dose-dependent and occurred at pharmacologic concentrations (IC(50) 10-100 nm). Midostaurin was also found to inhibit the IgE-dependent up-regulation of CD63 on cultured cord blood cell-derived human MC, but did not inhibit IgE-dependent up-regulation of CD63 or CD203c in human blood basophils.
Midostaurin may be a beneficial drug in aggressive systemic mastocytosis not only because of its growth-inhibitory effects but also because of its additional effects on activation and mediator release in MC and basophils.19860816
Basophil activation test in the diagnosis of insect venom allergies.
Eberlein B
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
19855266
Serial change in platelet activation markers with aspirin and clopidogrel after acute ischemic stroke.
Tsai Nai-Wen, Chang Wen-Neng, Shaw Chen-Fu, Jan Chung-Ren, Chang Hsueh-Wen, Huang Chi-Ren, Chen Shang-Der, Chuang Yao-Chung, Lee Lian-Hui, Lu Cheng-Hsien
Clinical neuropharmacology
Antiplatelet drugs are widely used for secondary prevention after cerebral ischemia of noncardioembolic origin and different antiplatelet drugs exert different pharmacologic effects. This study investigated differences in platelet activation markers in patients taking either aspirin or clopidogrel after acute ischemic stroke.
A prospective randomized case-control study evaluated 70 patients with noncardioembolic stroke treated with either aspirin (100 mg/d) or clopidogrel (75 mg/d) after acute ischemic stroke. Platelet activation markers (CD62P, CD63, and CD40L) were measured by flow cytometry at different time points (<48 hours and days 7, 30, and 90 after stroke). The markers were also evaluated in 30 at-risk control subjects.
Ischemic stroke patients had significantly increased circulating CD62P, CD63, and CD40L in the acute stage compared with the control group. Levels of CD62P, CD63, and CD40L were more significantly reduced in the clopidogrel group than in the aspirin group in the first week after stroke. Furthermore, differences in CD62P and CD63 levels were significant even at 1 month after stroke.
Patients treated with clopidogrel have lower platelet activity than those taking aspirin after acute ischemic stroke. The stronger effect of clopidogrel is notable 1 week after stroke and persists for at least 1 month. Further large-scale trials are warranted to clarify optimal treatment.19830727
Regulation of NK cell trafficking by CD81.
Krämer Benjamin, Schulte Daniela, Körner Christian, Zwank Claudia, Hartmann Agathe, Michalk Monika, Söhne Jennifer, Langhans Bettina, Nischalke Hans-Dieter, Coenen Martin, Möhl Christoph, Vogt Annabelle, Hennenberg Martin, Sauerbruch Tilman, Spengler Ulrich, Nattermann Jacob
European journal of immunology
NK cells, a heterogeneous sub-population of lymphocytes, are critically involved in the regulation of both innate and adaptive immune responses in humans. Besides their participation in the control of tumors and viral infections, they also regulate inflammatory processes, mediating both beneficial and detrimental effects. To effectively fulfil their role in immune surveillance, proper trafficking of NK cells is essential. However, the mechanisms and factors governing NK cell recruitment are only poorly dissected. Here, we describe the functional role of tetraspanins, a family of evolutionary conserved cell-surface proteins, in modulating migration and transmigration of human NK cells. We demonstrate expression of various tetraspanins on NK cells. Furthermore, we show that stimulation of the NK cell-expressed tetraspanin CD81 induces phosphorylation of ezrin/radixin/moesin proteins and leads to NK cell polarization thereby facilitating NK cell migration toward various chemokines/cytokines. Finally, we provide evidence for a role of CD81 in promoting adhesion of NK cells to components of the extracellular matrix, a prerequisite for extravasation of lymphocytes in inflamed tissues. Thus, our data suggest that the tetraspanin CD81 is importantly involved in the regulation of NK cell recruitment.19819840
[Formation and function of Weibel-Palade bodies].
Zhang Zhe, Li Wei
Yi chuan = Hereditas / Zhongguo yi chuan xue hui bian ji
Weibel-Palade bodies (WPB) are specialized cigar-shaped secretory organelles in endothelial cells, which contain a variety of biologically active molecules. These contents can be released rapidly by stimulation and involved in hemostasis, inflammation and angiogenesis. The main component of WPB is von Willebrand factor (vWF), whose expression and tubulation are necessary for the formation of the unique rod-like WPBs. Different molecules such as vWF, P-selectin, CD63, Rab27A and Rab3D are recruited into WPB mediated by the AP-1, AP-3 or other transport machinery. The underlying mechanism of the formation of WPB remains further investigation, which will gain insights into its function. The molecular mechanism of WPB formation and its function were discussed in this review.19810033
ExoCarta: A compendium of exosomal proteins and RNA.
Mathivanan Suresh, Simpson Richard J
Proteomics
Exosomes, membrane microvesicles (40-100 nm) secreted by most cell types, can be isolated in several ways while characterizing them is heavily based on electron microscopy and, most importantly, the identification of exosome marker proteins. Researchers rely on the identification of certain exosomal marker proteins including Alix, CD9 and CD63 to confirm the presence of exosomes in their preparations. An evolutionary-conserved set of protein molecules have been identified in most exosomes studied to date. However, with the complexity of tissue/cell type-specific proteins being incorporated in the exosomes, some of these so-called exosomal markers are not always present in all the exosomes. The presence of tissue/cell type-specific proteins in exosomes allows researchers to isolate them using immunoaffinity capture methods. A compendium for exosomal proteomes will aid researchers in identifying proteins that were more commonly found in various exosomes (exosome markers) and those that are specific to certain tissue/cell type-derived exosomes. Here, we describe ExoCarta, a compendium for proteins and RNA molecules identified in exosomes. ExoCarta is first of its kind and the resource is freely available to the scientific community through the web (http://exocarta.ludwig.edu.au). We believe that this community resource will be of great biological importance for any future exosome analyses.19804565
Different requirements for early and late phases of azurophilic granule-phagosome fusion.
Nordenfelt Pontus, Winberg Martin E, Lönnbro Per, Rasmusson Birgitta, Tapper Hans
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Phagocytosis and killing of microorganisms are complex processes that involve tightly regulated membrane traffic events. Because many signaling molecules associate with membrane rafts and because these structures can be found on azurophilic granules, we decided to investigate raft recruitment and the signaling requirements for azurophilic granule secretion during phagosome maturation. At the site of phagocytosis of immunoglobulin G-opsonized prey in human neutrophils, we found that early secretion of azurophilic granules was both raft- and calcium-dependent. Subsequently, rafts at the phagocytic site were internalized with the prey. At the fully formed phagosome, the fusion of azurophilic granules was no longer dependent on rafts or calcium. These findings were found to be true also when using Streptococcus pyogenes bacteria as prey, and depletion of calcium affected the kinetics of bacterial intracellular survival. These findings suggest that the mechanisms for delivery of azurophilic content to nascent and sealed phagosomes, respectively, differ in their dependence on calcium and membrane rafts.19801445
The microtubule modulator RanBP10 plays a critical role in regulation of platelet discoid shape and degranulation.
Kunert Stefan, Meyer Imke, Fleischhauer Silke, Wannack Martin, Fiedler Janine, Shivdasani Ramesh A, Schulze Harald
Blood
Terminally mature megakaryocytes undergo dramatic cellular reorganization to produce hundreds of virtually identical platelets. A hallmark feature of this process is the generation of an elaborate system of branched protrusions called proplatelets. We recently identified RanBP10 as a tubulin-binding protein that is concentrated along polymerized microtubules in mature megakaryocytes. RanBP10 depletion in vitro caused the disturbance of polymerized filaments. Here we study the function of RanBP10 in vivo by generating deficient mice using a gene-trap approach. Mutant mice show normal platelet counts, and fetal liver-derived megakaryocytes reveal only slightly reduced proplatelet formation. However, ultrastructural analysis unveiled a significantly increased geometric axis ratio for resting platelets, and many platelets exhibited disorders in microtubule filament numbers and localization. Mutant mice showed a markedly prolonged bleeding time. Granule release, a process that depends on internal contraction of the microtubule marginal coil, also was reduced. Flow cytometry analysis revealed reduced expression of CD62P and CD63 after PAR4-peptide stimulation. These data suggest that RanBP10 plays an essential role in hemostasis and in maintaining microtubule dynamics with respect to both platelet shape and function.19800679
Antigen-driven basophil activation is indicative of early Necator americanus infection in IgE-seronegative patients.
Falcone Franco H, Telford Gary, Hooi Doreen, Brown Alan P, Seabra Rita, Feary Johanna, Venn Andrea, Britton John, Pritchard David I
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Parasitic worms induce a strong, polarized T(H)2-type immune response. The kinetics of gastrointestinal nematode-induced T(H)2-type responses, especially in the context of primary infection, have been extensively studied in experimental infection models but not in human subjects.
We sought to determine the kinetics of basophil sensitization in subjects infected with Necator americanus during the first 12 weeks after infection.
Thirty nonasthmatic subjects with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis were randomized in a double-blind manner to cutaneous administration of either 10 hookworm infective larvae or histamine placebo. Blood samples were taken at regular intervals for 12 weeks, and basophil activation was determined in whole blood by measuring CD63 and CD203c levels on stimulation with N americanus excretions/secretions. Parasite-specific immunoglobulin responses were assessed by means of ELISA and Western blotting.
Median values reflecting basophil activation (CD203c/CD63 double-positive cells) in the excretion/secretion-stimulated infected group steadily increased after week 4, consistently achieving statistical significance compared with the placebo group between 6 and 12 weeks after infection. Only parasite-specific IgM levels increased significantly during this period, whereas total and parasite-specific IgE levels did not differ between groups.
Basophils are sensitized early in the context of a low-dose primary infection with N americanus in the absence of measurable total and specific IgE serum level increase.19795375
Interaction of Rab31 and OCRL-1 in oligodendrocytes: its role in transport of mannose 6-phosphate receptors.
Rodriguez-Gabin A G, Ortiz E, Demoliner K, Si Q, Almazan G, Larocca J N
Journal of neuroscience research
Rab31, a protein that we cloned from an oligodendrocyte cDNA library, is required for transport of mannose 6-phosphate receptors (MPRs) from the trans-Golgi network (TGN) to endosomes and for Golgi/TGN organization. Here we extend the knowledge of the mechanism of action of Rab31 by demonstrating its interaction with OCRL-1, a phosphatidylinositol 4,5-diphosphate 5-phosphatase (PI(4,5)P(2) 5-phosphatase) that regulates the levels of PI(4,5)P(2) and PI(4)P, molecules involved in transport and Golgi/TGN organization. We show that Rab31 interacts with OCRL-1 in a yeast two-hybrid system, GST-Rab31 pull-down experiments, and coimmunoprecipitation of OCRL-1 using oligodendrocyte culture lysates. Rab31 and OCRL-1 colocalize in the TGN, post-TGN carriers, and endosomes. Cation-dependent MPR (CD-MPR) is sorted to OCRL-1-containing carriers, but CD63 and vesicular stomatitis virus G (VSVG) are not. siRNA-mediated depletion of endogenous Rab31 causes collapse of the TGN apparatus and markedly decreases the levels of OCRL-1 in the TGN and endosomes. Our observations indicate that the role of Rab31 in the Golgi/TGN structure and transport of MPRs depends on its capability to recruit OCRL-1 to domains of the TGN where the formation of carriers occurs. The importance of our observations is highlighted by the fact that mutation of OCRL-1 causes demyelination in humans.
Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.19788509
Pressure-aided transfusion of platelets: does it affect the platelets?
Fischer-Nielsen Anne, Stissing Trine, Maansson Charlotte, Joergensen Bent Gymoese
Transfusion
In massively bleeding patients, pressure infusers are used for transfusion of red blood cells and plasma but not for platelets (PLTs) due to an assumed negative effect on the PLTs. This study examined whether pressure-aided in vitro transfusion affected the number, activation state, and/or function of the PLTs as measured by flow cytometry and thrombelastography (TEG).
PLT concentrates stored for 1 (n = 8) or 8 (n = 7) days were transfused in vitro by means of a pressure inducer (300 mmHg). Samples before and after transfusion were measured for PLT concentration and expression of CD62P, CD63, and PAC-1. These activation markers were measured by flow cytometry on resting PLTs as well as PLTs stimulated with thrombin receptor-activating peptide. Clot generation and strength was examined by TEG by measuring the angle (degree) and maximum amplitude (mm), values that are highly dependent on the PLT function.
PLT concentrations were unchanged after pressure-aided transfusion reflecting no destruction. With respect to activation state and in vitro functional capacity either no or only minor differences (<7%) were detected.
In this study, use of a pressure inducer decreased the transfusion time of in vitro PLT transfusion by approximately 50%. No or only minor and inconsistent changes of the PLT number and function were observed. Consequently, this study indicates that pressure infusers could be used for transfusion of PLTs if clinically indicated, that is, in massively bleeding patients. However, in vivo studies to assess the safety and utility of pressure-aided PLT transfusion are warranted.19764654
[Ubiquitination of EGF receptors with C-terminal domain deletion and point mutations during endocytosis].
Kondratov K A, Melikova M S, Chernorudskiĭ A L, Kornilova E S
Tsitologiia
Analysis of ubiquitination of EGF receptor carrying different mutations of C-terminal domain was done. The mutants differed both by the set of major autophosphorylation sites that determine the way of interaction with ubiquitin-ligase c-Cbl, and by the presence of lysine residues which can be possible acceptor sites for ubiquitin. It was found that the receptor lacking tyrosine kinase activity due to lysine for phenylalanine substitution at ATP-binding site of tyrosine kinase (TK) domain (K721) failed to be ubiquitinated as well as the receptor without all binding sites for c-Cbl (CD165), while dynamics and pattern of ubiquitination of other deletion mutants was significantly different. The mutant lacking Grb2 binding sites but able to bind c-Cbl directly (CD123) was minimally ubiquitinated and only at early stages upon EGF endocytosis stimulation. At the same time, the receptor possessing all binding sites for Cbl but lacking C-terminal domain of 63 aminoacid residues (CD63) which contains two autophosphorylation sites (Y1148 and 1173) and 4 lysines, was less ubiquitinated and had more low-ubiquitinated forms comparing to the WT one. However, these lysines are not acceptor sites for ubiquitin since the full-size receptor lacking like CD63 the same major autophosphorylation sites underwent ubiquitination similar to the deletion mutant. Thus, C-terminal region of the EGF receptor, being not a substrate for ubiquitination per se, is involved in its regulation. It was also found that ubiquitination pattern at fast endocytosis differed from those at slow one. In the first case the total level of EGFR decreased dramatically as a result of efficient lysosomal degradation. The level of receptor-associated c-Cbl was practically the same, while the total intracellular c-Cbl dropped. Treatment of cells with proteasomal inhibition MG132 blocked the loss of Cbl only partially. In the second case, total amount of both EGF receptor and c-Cbl did not notably change that suggested recycling pathway for receptors even despite them beeng ubiquitinated.19746444
Runx2, p53, and pRB status as diagnostic parameters for deregulation of osteoblast growth and differentiation in a new pre-chemotherapeutic osteosarcoma cell line (OS1).
Pereira Barry P, Zhou Yefang, Gupta Anurag, Leong David T, Aung Khin Zarchi, Ling Ling, Pho Robert W H, Galindo Mario, Salto-Tellez Manuel, Stein Gary S, Cool Simon M, van Wijnen Andre J, Nathan Saminathan S
Journal of cellular physiology
Osteosarcomas are the most prevalent primary bone tumors found in pediatric patients. To understand their molecular etiology, cell culture models are used to define disease mechanisms under controlled conditions. Many osteosarcoma cell lines (e.g., SAOS-2, U2OS, MG63) are derived from Caucasian patients. However, patients exhibit individual and ethnic differences in their responsiveness to irradiation and chemotherapy. This motivated the establishment of osteosarcoma cell lines (OS1, OS2, OS3) from three ethnically Chinese patients. OS1 cells, derived from a pre-chemotherapeutic tumor in the femur of a 6-year-old female, were examined for molecular markers characteristic for osteoblasts, stem cells, and cell cycle control by immunohistochemistry, reverse transcriptase-PCR, Western blotting and flow cytometry. OS1 have aberrant G-banded karyotypes, possibly reflecting chromosomal abnormalities related to p53 deficiency. OS1 had ossification profiles similar to human fetal osteoblasts rather than SAOS-2 which ossifies ab initio (P < 0.05). Absence of p53 correlates with increased Runx2 expression, while the slow proliferation of OS1 cells is perhaps attenuated by pRB retention. OS1 express mesenchymal stem cell markers (CD44, CD105) and differ in relative expression of CD29, CD63, and CD71 to SAOS-2. (P < 0.05). Cell cycle synchronization with nocodazole did not affect Runx2 and CDK1 levels but decreased cyclin-E and increased cyclin-A (P < 0.05). Xenotransplantion of OS1 in SCID mice yields spontaneous tumors that were larger and grew faster than SAOS-2 transplants. Hence, OS1 is a new osteosarcoma cell culture model derived from a pre-chemotherapeutic ethnic Chinese patient, for mechanistic studies and development of therapeutic strategies to counteract metastasis and deregulation of mesenchymal development.19736974
Carbon nanotubes activate blood platelets by inducing extracellular Ca2+ influx sensitive to calcium entry inhibitors.
Semberova Jana, De Paoli Lacerda Silvia H, Simakova Olga, Holada Karel, Gelderman Monique P, Simak Jan
Nano letters
To elucidate a mechanism of prothrombotic effects of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), we report here that multiwalled CNTs activate blood platelets by inducing extracellular Ca(2+) influx that could be inhibited by calcium channel blockers SKF 96365 and 2-APB. We also demonstrate platelet aggregating activity of different single-walled and multiwalled CNTs. In addition, we show that CNT-induced platelet activation is associated with a marked release of platelet membrane microparticles positive for the granular secretion markers CD62P and CD63.19732049
Allergy from giant pumpkin (Cucurbita maxima) is not a fairy tale.
Hagendorens M M, Carrette M, Bridts C H, Stevens W J, Ebo D G
Allergy
19730003
Increased leukocyte-platelet interactions during circulatory support with left ventricular assist devices.
Radovancevic Rajko, Matijevic Nena, Bracey Arthur W, Radovancevic Branislav, Elayda MacArthur, Gregoric Igor D, Frazier O H
ASAIO journal (American Society for Artificial Internal Organs : 1992)
The interaction of circulating monocytes and platelets may contribute to thrombosis and inflammation in heart failure. We studied platelet and monocyte activation in 15 patients with end-stage heart failure who underwent left ventricular assist device (LVAD) placement. Blood samples were collected before and at 3, 7, 14, 21, 30, 60, 90, and 180 days after LVAD implantation. We used flow cytometry to measure the expression of platelet surface glycoprotein receptors, platelet activation markers, monocyte markers, the formation of platelet complexes with monocytes (MPC), granulocytes, and lymphocytes, and platelet glycoprotein (GP) IIIa (PLA1/A2) polymorphism. The average preoperative percentage of CD62P-positive platelets was 27% +/- 17%; CD63-positive platelets, 9.7% +/- 8.1%; thrombospondin-positive platelets, 9.9% +/- 6.8%; and MPCs, 10.3% +/- 4.3%. No significant changes were noted in the percent of activated platelets with the three markers. Percentage of MPCs increased over time and peaked at day 21 (26.3% +/- 10.6%, p = 0.0028). In about 40% of patients, activation markers remained high up to 60 days after implantation. We found a significant positive correlation between MPC and CD14 (R = 0.60, p = 0.011), and a negative correlation between MPC and P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) (R = -0.84, p < 0.0001), and between CD14 and PSGL-1 (R = -0.46, p = 0.022) indicating monocyte activation. These results indicate increased platelet and monocyte activation and interactions in patients undergoing long-term LVAD support.19726089
Channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus Rafinesque, 1818) tetraspanin membrane protein family: identification, characterization and expression analysis of CD63 cDNA.
Yeh Hung-Yueh, Klesius Phillip H
Veterinary immunology and immunopathology
CD63, known as lysosome associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP-3), is a member of the tetraspanin integral membrane protein family. This protein plays many important roles in immuno-physiological functions. In this communication, we report the identification, characterization, and expression analysis of the channel catfish CD63 transcript. The complete nucleic acid sequence of channel catfish CD63 cDNA was comprised of 1159 nucleotides, including an open reading frame, which appears to encode a putative peptide of 237-amino-acid residues. Like other tetraspanin proteins, the channel catfish CD63 peptide can be divided into domains, including four transmembrane domains, three intracellular domains, and one of each small and large extracellular loops. The channel catfish CD63 peptide shares 52-55% identity among fish counterparts, but only 43-46% identity among mammalian counterparts. The characteristic Cys-Cys-Gly motif and four Cys residues in the large extracellular loop were conserved. The channel catfish CD63 transcript was detected by RT-PCR in spleen, anterior kidney, liver, intestine, skin and gill. This result provides important information for further elucidating CD63 functions in channel catfish.
Published by Elsevier B.V.19721872
Hematopoietic progenitor cells regulate their niche microenvironment through a novel mechanism of cell-cell communication.
Gillette Jennifer M, Lippincott-Schwartz Jennifer
Communicative & integrative biology
Cellular communication within a larger microenvironment is critical for a number of physiological processes. Within the bone marrow niche, direct cell communication between hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) and osteoblasts provides essential cues for their proliferation and survival. While contact-dependent communication between HPCs and osteoblasts is known to be critical, the molecular pathways that govern this interaction are largely unclear. Moreover, the downstream events occurring at the HPC/osteoblast contact site remain uncharacterized, despite their major role in signaling and remodeling within the niche microenvironment. Using live cell imaging approaches, we found that intercellular transfer is a novel mode of cell communication within the bone marrow niche microenvironment. HPCs made prolonged contact with the osteoblast surface via a specialized membrane domain enriched in prominin 1, CD63 and rhodamine PE. At the contact site, portions of the HPC specialized domain containing these molecules were taken up by the osteoblast and internalized into long-lived, SARA-positive, signaling endosomes. This resulted in the down-regulation of Smad signaling by the osteoblasts and a subsequent increase in the production of stromal-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), a chemokine responsible for HPC homing to bone marrow. These findings identify a novel mechanism involving intercellular transfer to signaling endosomes for targeted regulation of signaling and remodeling events within the osteoblastic niche microenvironment.19712048
Existence of exocytotic hemifusion intermediates with a lifetime of up to seconds in type II pneumocytes.
Miklavc Pika, Albrecht Susanne, Wittekindt Oliver H, Schullian Peter, Haller Thomas, Dietl Paul
The Biochemical journal
Exocytosis proceeds through prefusion stages such as hemifusion, but hemifusion is still an elusive intermediate of unknown duration. Using darkfield and fluorescence microscopy in ATII (alveolar type II) cells containing large secretory vesicles (LBs; lamellar bodies), we show that exocytotic fusion events were accompanied by a mostly biphasic SLID (scattered light intensity decrease) originating from the vesicle border. Correlation with the diffusional behaviour of fluorescence markers for either content or membrane mixing revealed that the onset of the fast second phase of SLID corresponded to fusion pore formation, which was followed by vesicle swelling. In contrast, a slow first phase of SLID preceded pore formation considerably but could still be accompanied by diffusion of farnesylated DsRed, an inner plasma membrane leaflet marker, or Nile Red. We conclude that hemifusion is an exocytotic intermediate that may last for several seconds. SLID is a new, non-invasive approach by which a prefusion phase, including hemifusion, can be continuously recorded and distinguished from fusion pore formation and postfusion vesicle swelling.19706688
A novel mechanism of sodium iodide symporter repression in differentiated thyroid cancer.
Smith Vicki E, Read Martin L, Turnell Andrew S, Watkins Rachel J, Watkinson John C, Lewy Greg D, Fong Jim C W, James Sally R, Eggo Margaret C, Boelaert Kristien, Franklyn Jayne A, McCabe Christopher J
Journal of cell science
Differentiated thyroid cancers and their metastases frequently exhibit reduced iodide uptake, impacting on the efficacy of radioiodine ablation therapy. PTTG binding factor (PBF) is a proto-oncogene implicated in the pathogenesis of thyroid cancer. We recently reported that PBF inhibits iodide uptake, and have now elucidated a mechanism by which PBF directly modulates sodium iodide symporter (NIS) activity in vitro. In subcellular localisation studies, PBF overexpression resulted in the redistribution of NIS from the plasma membrane into intracellular vesicles, where it colocalised with the tetraspanin CD63. Cell-surface biotinylation assays confirmed a reduction in plasma membrane NIS expression following PBF transfection compared with vector-only treatment. Coimmunoprecipitation and GST-pull-down experiments demonstrated a direct interaction between NIS and PBF, the functional consequence of which was assessed using iodide-uptake studies in rat thyroid FRTL-5 cells. PBF repressed iodide uptake, whereas three deletion mutants, which did not localise within intracellular vesicles, lost the ability to inhibit NIS activity. In summary, we present an entirely novel mechanism by which the proto-oncogene PBF binds NIS and alters its subcellular localisation, thereby regulating its ability to uptake iodide. Given that PBF is overexpressed in thyroid cancer, these findings have profound implications for thyroid cancer ablation using radioiodine.19704780
Tetraspanins: Small transmembrane proteins with big impact on membrane microdomain structures.
Singethan Katrin, Schneider-Schaulies Jürgen
Communicative & integrative biology
Members of the tetraspanin family of transmembrane proteins including CD9, CD37, CD53, CD63, CD81, CD82, CD151, etc., contribute to the structural organization of the plasma membrane by forming microdomain structures, influencing cell fusion and regulating cell motility. Interestingly, K41, a CD9-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb), inhibits the release of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1), and the canine distemper virus (CDV)-, but not measles virus (MV)-induced cell-cell fusion. This mAb, which recognizes a conformational epitope on the large extracellular loop (LEL) of CD9, induced rapid relocation and clustering of CD9 in net-like structures at cell-cell contact areas.1 High-resolution analyses revealed that CD9 clustering is accompanied by the formation of microvilli that protrude from either side of adjacent cell surfaces, thus forming structures like microvilli zippers. While the cellular CD9-associated proteins beta1-integrin and EWI-F were co-clustered with CD9 at cell-cell interfaces, viral proteins in infected cells were differentially affected. MV envelope proteins were detected within, whereas CDV proteins were excluded from CD9 clusters, and thus, the tetraspanin CD9 can regulate cell-cell fusion by controlling the access of the viral fusion machinery to cell contact areas.19690440
Expression of tumor necrosis factor receptors on granulocytes in patients with myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody-associated vasculitis.
Hasegawa Midori, Nishii Chikako, Ohashi Atsushi, Tomita Makoto, Nakai Shigeru, Murakami Kazutaka, Nabeshima Kunihiro, Fujita Yoshirou, Ishii Junichi, Hiki Yoshiyuki, Sugiyama Satoshi
Nephron. Clinical practice
To clarify the clinical significance of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors in patients with myeloperoxidase (MPO)-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis, we evaluated the cell surface expression of TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) and TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2).
43 patients with MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis, 16 patients with chronic renal failure, 10 patients with sepsis, 15 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, and 18 healthy controls were enrolled in this study, and the surface expression levels of TNFR1, TNFR2, CD63, and CD64 on granulocytes were assessed. In 21 patients with MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis, soluble TNFR1 (sTNFR1), soluble TNFR2(sTNFR2), and TNF-alpha in the serum were also measured.
The surface expression levels of TNFR1 and TNFR2 on granulocytes were significantly higher in patients with MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis than in the healthy controls, and positively correlated with the Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS). The levels of sTNFR1, sTNFR2, and TNF-alpha in the serum were also significantly higher in patients with MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis than in the healthy controls. Serum levels of sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 correlated with serum creatinine, while the surface expression of TNFR1 and TNFR2 on the granulocytes did not. There was no significant correlation between the BVAS and CD63 or BVAS and CD64.
The surface expression levels of TNFR1 and TNFR2 on granulocytes were upregulated in patients with MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis and reflected disease activity.
Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.19689457
Basophil responsiveness in patients with insect sting allergies and negative venom-specific immunoglobulin E and skin prick test results.
Korosec P, Erzen R, Silar M, Bajrovic N, Kopac P, Kosnik M
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Current guidelines do not adequately address the question of how best to manage patients with a convincing history of insect allergy, but negative venom-specific IgE and skin test results.
Forty-seven patients out of a total of 1219 (4%), with a positive history of sting allergy, were recruited over a period of 4.5 years. All recruited patients had a convincing history of a severe or a life-threatening anaphylactic reaction of Mueller grade II-IV (median grade III) after Hymenoptera sting, but negative venom-specific IgE and skin prick test results. Diagnostic work-up was prospectively followed by the CD63 basophil activation test and by intradermal skin testing. A control group of 25 subjects was also assessed.
Thirty-five out of 47 (75%) patients demonstrated a positive basophil CD63 response after stimulation with bee and/or wasp venom. Intradermal venom skin tests were performed for 37 patients, 17 (46%) of whom showed positive results. Out of 20 patients who demonstrated negative intradermal test results, 12 patients showed a positive CD63 response (60%). In contrast, out of 9 patients who showed a negative CD63 response, only one was detected by intradermal testing (11%). In the control group, only two out of 25 (4%) subjects displayed a positive basophil response and/or intradermal test.
Here we show that, in complex cases with inconclusive diagnostic results, the CD63 activation test could be particularly useful and more sensitive than intradermal skin testing.19681903
Expression of podoplanin, CD44, and p63 in squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.
Shimada Yoshihisa, Ishii Genichiro, Nagai Kanji, Atsumi Naho, Fujii Satoshi, Yamada Atsushi, Yamane Yuki, Hishida Tomoyuki, Nishimura Mitsuyo, Yoshida Junji, Ikeda Norihiko, Ochiai Atsushi
Cancer science
Recent molecular biological studies have identified podoplanin as a candidate cancer stem cell (CSC) marker in squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC). The purpose of this study was to examine the expression pattern of podoplanin, and the other stem cell markers CD44 and p63, and their relationship to clinico-pathological features including survival in pulmonary SqCC. We examined histologically the expression of podoplanin, CD44, and p63 in 162 consecutive SqCC by immunostaining. Podoplanin expression was observed in 107 (66%) tumors, CD44 in 145 (89.5%), and p63 in 151 (93.2%), respectively. In 95.3% of the podoplanin-positive tumors, tumor cells showing strong expression were localized in the periphery of the tumor nests. However, this peripheral localization was observed in only 55.9% of the CD44-positive and 43% of p63-positive tumors. In 88.8% of the podoplanin-positive tumors, positive cells were localized more peripherally in the tumor nests than CD44- or p63-positive cells and when CD44 and p63 expressions were compared in these podoplanin-positive tumors, p63-positive layers in the periphery of the tumor nests were broader compared to CD44-positive layers. These findings suggest tumor cells are aligned in the "hierarchical distribution pattern" according to the expression of these three markers. Patients who had podoplanin-positive tumors with the "hierarchical pattern" resulted in significantly better overall survival than those who had podoplanin-negative tumors (P = 0.043). These results suggest that podoplanin expression would reflect the most immature status in the differentiation process of SqCC, and SqCC with hierarchical expression would be a well-organized tumor group with lower biological aggressiveness based on the CSC concept.19679886
Two patients with Hermansky Pudlak syndrome type 2 and novel mutations in AP3B1.
Wenham Matt, Grieve Samantha, Cummins Michelle, Jones Matthew L, Booth Sarah, Kilner Rachel, Ancliff Philip J, Griffiths Gillian M, Mumford Andrew D
Haematologica
Hermansky Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS2) is a rare disorder associated with mutations in the Adaptor Protein 3 (AP-3) complex, which is involved in sorting transmembrane proteins to lysosomes and related organelles. We now report 2 unrelated subjects with HPS2 who show a characteristic clinical phenotype of oculocutaneous albinism, platelet and T-lymphocyte dysfunction and neutropenia. The subjects were homozygous for different deletions within AP3B1 (g.del180242-180866, c.del153-156), which encodes the AP-3beta3A subunit, resulting in frame shifts and introduction of nonsense substitutions (p.E693fsX13, p.E52fsX11). In the subject with p.E693fsX13, this resulted in expression of a truncated variant beta3A protein. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) clones from both study subjects showed increased cell-surface expression of CD63 and reduced cytotoxicity. Platelets showed impaired aggregation and reduced uptake of (3)H-serotonin. These findings are consistent with CTL granule and platelet dense granule defects, respectively. This report extends the clinical and laboratory description of HPS2.19640571
Palmitoylation supports the association of tetraspanin CD63 with CD9 and integrin alphaIIbbeta3 in activated platelets.
Israels Sara J, McMillan-Ward Eileen M
Thrombosis research
CD63 and CD9 are members of the tetraspanin superfamily of integral membrane proteins that function as organizers of multi-molecular signaling complexes involved in cell morphology, motility and proliferation. Tetraspanin complexes cluster dynamically in unique cholesterol-rich tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs). In resting platelets, CD63 is located in the membranes of lysosomes and dense granules. Following platelet activation and granule exocytosis, CD63 is expressed on the plasma membrane, co-localizes with the alphaIIbbeta3-CD9 complex and is incorporated into the Triton-insoluble actin cytoskeleton, dependent on fibrinogen binding to alphaIIbbeta3. In nucleated cell lines, the assembly and maintenance of TEMs depends on the palmitoylation of both tetraspanins and some partner proteins. This study investigated the role of palmitoylation in platelet TEM assembly and maintenance. [(3)H]-palmitate-labeled, washed human platelets were studied at rest, or following activation with thrombin (0.1 U/ml). CD63 and CD9 were separated by density gradient centrifugation, isolated by immunoprecipitation, and [(3)H]-palmitate was measured in each fraction. Palmitate levels increased in all fractions following thrombin activation. However, the relative inter-fraction distribution of the tetraspanins did not change. 2-bromopalmitate (2-BP), an inhibitor of protein palmitoylation as demonstrated by decreased [(3)H]-palmitate labeling of platelet proteins, blocked both thrombin-induced platelet aggregation and platelet spreading on immobilized fibrinogen in a dose-dependent manner. 2-BP also inhibited the activation-dependent association of CD63 with CD9, and the incorporation of CD63 into the Triton-insoluble actin cytoskeleton. In contrast, 2-BP had no effect on the incorporation of alphaIIbbeta3 into the activated platelet cytoskeleton. These results demonstrate that palmitoylation is required for platelet tetraspanin-tetraspanin and tetraspanin-integrin interaction and for complete platelet spreading on a fibrinogen substrate.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.19640298
Enrichment and analysis of secretory lysosomes from lymphocyte populations.
Schmidt Hendrik, Gelhaus Christoph, Lucius Ralph, Nebendahl Melanie, Leippe Matthias, Janssen Ottmar
BMC immunology
In specialized cells, such as mast cells, macrophages, T lymphocytes and Natural Killer cells in the immune system and for instance melanocytes in the skin, secretory lysosomes (SL) have evolved as bifunctional organelles that combine degradative and secretory properties. Mutations in lysosomal storage, transport or sorting molecules are associated with severe immunodeficiencies, autoimmunity and (partial) albinism. In order to analyze the function and content of secretory lysosomes in different cell populations, an efficient enrichment of these organelles is mandatory.
Based on a combination of differential and density gradient centrifugation steps, we provide a protocol to enrich intact SL from expanded hematopoietic cells, here T lymphocytes and Natural Killer cells. Individual fractions were initially characterized by Western blotting using antibodies against an array of marker proteins for intracellular compartments. As indicated by the presence of LAMP-3 (CD63) and FasL (CD178), we obtained a selective enrichment of SL in one of the resulting organelle fractions. The robustness and reproducibility of the applied separation protocol was examined by a high-resolution proteome analysis of individual SL preparations of different donors by 2D difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE).
The provided protocol is readily applicable to enrich and isolate intact secretory vesicles from individual cell populations. It can be used to compare SL of normal and transformed cell lines or primary cell populations from healthy donors and patients with lysosomal storage or transport diseases, or from corresponding mutant mice. A subsequent proteome analysis allows the characterization of molecules involved in lysosomal maturation and cytotoxic effector function at high-resolution.19633966
Advanced glycation end products strongly activate platelets.
Gawlowski Thomas, Stratmann Bernd, Ruetter Ruth, Buenting Christina E, Menart Barbara, Weiss Jürgen, Vlassara Helen, Koschinsky Theodor, Tschoepe Diethelm
European journal of nutrition
Diabetes mellitus is characterized by hyperglycemia that plays an important role in the pathogenesis of diabetic complications including cardiovascular diseases. Moreover, hyperglycemia induces increased generation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). The activation of platelets is associated with the development of cardiovascular diseases.
The question whether AGEs acutely induce platelet activation as a response to exogenous stimulus is addressed.
The effect of AGEs derived from food and human serum being purified by lysozyme affinity chromatography was examined by incubating in vitro freshly isolated blood platelets from fasted subjects at various concentrations and different time points. Platelet activation, determined as expression of surface markers CD62 and CD63, and the presence of the receptor for AGEs (RAGE) in platelet membranes was measured by flow cytometric analysis using specific antibodies.
Incubation with food-derived as well as serum-derived AGEs stimulated significantly the expression of CD62 up to 7.1-fold and CD63 up to 2.2-fold at the platelet surface membrane as a function of concentration and time. Incubation with thrombin or AGEs significantly increased RAGE expression twofold at the platelet surface membrane.
The increase in surface activation marker and RAGE expression in platelets, resulting from concentrations of AGEs that occur in vivo after a meal or a drink as a source of exogenous AGEs, points to signaling mechanisms for food AGEs that could favor the precipitation of acute postprandial ischemic events.19608683
The JAK2V617 mutation induces constitutive activation and agonist hypersensitivity in basophils from patients with polycythemia vera.
Pieri Lisa, Bogani Costanza, Guglielmelli Paola, Zingariello Maria, Rana Rosa Alba, Bartalucci Niccolò, Bosi Alberto, Vannucchi Alessandro M
Haematologica
The JAK2V617F mutation has been associated with constitutive and enhanced activation of neutrophils, while no information is available concerning other leukocyte subtypes.
We evaluated correlations between JAK2V617F mutation and the count of circulating basophils, the number of activated CD63(+) basophils, their response in vitro to agonists as well as the effects of a JAK2 inhibitor.
We found that basophil count was increased in patients with JAK2V617F -positive myeloproliferative neoplasms, particularly in those with polycythemia vera, and was correlated with the V617F burden. The burden of V617F allele was similar in neutrophils and basophils from patients with polycythemia vera, while total JAK2 mRNA content was remarkably greater in the basophils; however, the content of JAK2 protein in basophils was not increased. The number of CD63(+) basophils was higher in patients with polycythemia vera than in healthy subjects or patients with essential thrombocythemia or primary myelofibrosis and was correlated with the V617F burden. Ultrastructurally, basophils from patients with polycythemia vera contained an increased number of granules, most of which were empty suggesting cell degranulation in vivo. Ex vivo experiments revealed that basophils from patients with polycythemia vera were hypersensitive to the priming effect of interleukin-3 and to f-MLP-induced activation; pre-treatment with a JAK2 inhibitor reduced polycythemia vera basophil activation. Finally, we found that the number of circulating CD63(+) basophils was significantly greater in patients suffering from aquagenic pruritus, who also showed a higher V617F allele burden.
These data indicate that the number of constitutively activated and hypersensitive circulating basophils is increased in polycythemia vera, underscoring a role of JAK2V617F in these cells' abnormal function and, putatively, in the pathogenesis of pruritus.19608627
The microRNA miR-92 increases proliferation of myeloid cells and by targeting p63 modulates the abundance of its isoforms.
Manni Isabella, Artuso Simona, Careccia Silvia, Rizzo Maria Giulia, Baserga Renato, Piaggio Giulia, Sacchi Ada
FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
MicroRNAs (miRs) are 21- to 23-nucleotide RNA molecules that regulate the stability or translational efficiency of target messenger RNAs of proteins involved in cell growth and apoptosis. miR-92 is part of the mir-17-92 cluster, which comprises members with an effect on cell proliferation. However, the role of miR-92 is unknown, and its targets have not been identified. Here, we describe a mechanism through which miR-92 contributes to regulate cell proliferation. Using a miR-92 synthetic double-strand oligonucleotide, we demonstrate that miR-92 increases 32D myeloid cell proliferation and 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and inhibits cell death. The effect is miR-92 specific since the miR-92 antagomir inhibits cell proliferation. Moreover, we show that miR-92 acts by modulating p63-isoform abundance through down-regulatation of endogenous DeltaNp63beta. Using luciferase reporters containing p63 3'UTR fragments with wild-type or mutant miR-92 complementary sites, we demonstrate that the wild-type 3'UTR is a direct target of miR-92. Finally, we observed that a miR-92-resistant DeltaNp63beta isoform (without 3'UTR) inhibits cell proliferation and parallels the effect of the antagomir. We conclude that one of the molecular mechanisms through which miR-92 increases cell proliferation is by negative regulation of an isoform of the cell-cycle regulator p63.19602278
Tetraspanins regulate cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1.
Krementsov Dimitry N, Weng Jia, Lambelé Marie, Roy Nathan H, Thali Markus
Retrovirology
The presence of the tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD81 and CD82 at HIV-1 budding sites, at the virological synapse (VS), and their enrichment in HIV-1 virions has been well-documented, but it remained unclear if these proteins play a role in the late phase of the viral replication cycle. Here we used overexpression and knockdown approaches to address this question.
Neither ablation of CD9, CD63 and/or CD81, nor overexpression of these tetraspanins was found to affect the efficiency of virus release. However, confirming recently reported data, tetraspanin overexpression in virus-producing cells resulted in the release of virions with substantially reduced infectivity. We also investigated the roles of these tetraspanins in cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1. Overexpression of CD9 and CD63 led to reduced cell-to-cell transmission of this virus. Interestingly, in knockdown experiments we found that ablation of CD63, CD9 and/or CD81 had no effect on cell-free infectivity. However, knockdown of CD81, but not CD9 and CD63, enhanced productive particle transmission to target cells, suggesting additional roles for tetraspanins in the transmission process. Finally, tetraspanins were found to be downregulated in HIV-1-infected T lymphocytes, suggesting that HIV-1 modulates the levels of these proteins in order to maximize the efficiency of its transmission within the host.
Altogether, these results establish an active role of tetraspanins in HIV-1 producer cells.19594910
Reactivation from latency displays HIV particle budding at plasma membrane, accompanying CD44 upregulation and recruitment.
Suyama Mari, Daikoku Eriko, Goto Toshiyuki, Sano Kouichi, Morikawa Yuko
Retrovirology
It has been accepted that HIV buds from the cell surface in T lymphocytes, whereas in macrophages it buds into intracellular endosomes. Recent studies, on the other hand, suggest that HIV preferentially buds from the cell surface even in monocytic cells. However, most studies are based on observations in acutely infected cells and little is known about HIV budding concomitant with reactivation from latency. Such studies would provide a better understanding of a reservoir for HIV.
We observed HIV budding in latently infected T lymphocytic and monocytic cell lines following TNF-alpha stimulation and examined the upregulation of host factors that may be involved in particle production. Electron microscopy analysis revealed that reactivation of latently infected J1.1 cells (latently infected Jurkat cells with HIV-1) and U1 cells (latently infected U937 cells with HIV-1) displayed HIV particle budding predominantly at the plasma membrane, a morphology that is similar to particle budding in acutely infected Jurkat and U937 cells. When mRNA expression levels were quantified by qRT-PCR, we found that particle production from reactivated J1.1 and U1 cells was accompanied by CD44 upregulation. This upregulation was similarly observed when Jurkat and U937 cells were acutely infected with HIV-1 but not when just stimulated with TNF-alpha, suggesting that CD44 upregulation was linked with HIV production but not with cell stimulation. The molecules in endocytic pathways such as CD63 and HRS were also upregulated when U1 cells were reactivated and U937 cells were acutely infected with HIV-1. Confocal microscopy revealed that these upregulated host molecules were recruited to and accumulated at the sites where mature particles were formed at the plasma membrane.
Our study indicates that HIV particles are budded at the plasma membrane upon reactivation from latency, a morphology that is similar to particle budding in acute infection. Our data also suggest that HIV expression may lead to the upregulation of certain host cell molecules that are recruited to sites of particle assembly, possibly coordinating particle production.19594752
Intracellular sequestration of amiodarone: role of vacuolar ATPase and macroautophagic transition of the resulting vacuolar cytopathology.
Morissette G, Ammoury A, Rusu D, Marguery M C, Lodge R, Poubelle P E, Marceau F
British journal of pharmacology
Tissue deposits of the anti-arrhythmic drug amiodarone are a major source of side effects (skin discoloration, etc.). We addressed the mechanism of the concentration of amiodarone in cells, and characterized the resulting vacuolar cytopathology and its evolution towards macroautophagy.
Sequestration of amiodarone in human cells (macrophages, smooth muscle cells, HEK 293a cells) was evaluated using its violet fluorescence and cytopathology using GFP-conjugated subcellular markers. Autophagic signalling was probed by immunoblotting for the effector protein LC3. A patient biopsy of amiodarone-induced blue-gray skin discoloration was investigated for the presence of macroautophagy (immunofluorescence for LC3).
Most of the amiodarone (1-20 microM, 4-24 h) captured by cultured cells (macrophages were most avid) was present in enlarged vacuoles. The specific vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) inhibitors, bafilomycin A1 or FR167356, prevented vacuolization and drug uptake. Vacuoles in HEK 293a cells were positive for markers of late endosomes and lysosomes (GFP-Rab7, -CD63) and for an effector of macroautophagy, GFP-LC3. The vacuoles accumulated endogenous LC3 and filled with lipids (Nile red staining) following longer amiodarone treatments (> or =24 h). The electrophoretic mobility of both GFP-LC3 and endogenous LC3 changed, showing activation in response to amiodarone. Paraffin tissue sections of the pigmented skin exhibited granular LC3 accumulation in superficial dermis macrophages.
Vacuolar sequestration of amiodarone occurs at concentrations close to therapeutic levels, is mediated by V-ATPase and evolves towards persistent macroautophagy and phospholipidosis. This cytopathology is not cell type specific, but tissue macrophages appear to be particularly susceptible.19566896
Involvement of vps33a in the fusion of uroplakin-degrading multivesicular bodies with lysosomes.
Guo Xuemei, Tu Liyu, Gumper Iwona, Plesken Heide, Novak Edward K, Chintala Sreenivasulu, Swank Richard T, Pastores Gregory, Torres Paola, Izumi Tetsuro, Sun Tung-Tien, Sabatini David D, Kreibich Gert
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
The apical surface of the terminally differentiated mouse bladder urothelium is largely covered by urothelial plaques, consisting of hexagonally packed 16-nm uroplakin particles. These plaques are delivered to the cell surface by fusiform vesicles (FVs) that are the most abundant cytoplasmic organelles. We have analyzed the functional involvement of several proteins in the apical delivery and endocytic degradation of uroplakin proteins. Although FVs have an acidified lumen and Rab27b, which localizes to these organelles, is known to be involved in the targeting of lysosome-related organelles (LROs), FVs are CD63 negative and are therefore not typical LROs. Vps33a is a Sec1-related protein that plays a role in vesicular transport to the lysosomal compartment. A point mutation in mouse Vps33a (Buff mouse) causes albinism and bleeding (Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome) because of abnormalities in the trafficking of melanosomes and platelets. These Buff mice showed a novel phenotype observed in urothelial umbrella cells, where the uroplakin-delivering FVs were almost completely replaced by Rab27b-negative multivesicular bodies (MVBs) involved in uroplakin degradation. MVB accumulation leads to an increase in the amounts of uroplakins, Lysosomal-associated membrane protein (LAMP)-1/2, and the activities of beta-hexosaminidase and beta-glucocerebrosidase. These results suggest that FVs can be regarded as specialized secretory granules that deliver crystalline arrays of uroplakins to the cell surface, and that the Vps33a mutation interferes with the fusion of MVBs with mature lysosomes thus blocking uroplakin degradation.19563997
The basophil activation test in immediate-type drug allergy.
Hausmann Oliver V, Gentinetta Thomas, Bridts Chris H, Ebo Didier G
Immunology and allergy clinics of North America
Diagnosis of drug allergy involves first the recognition of sometimes unusual symptoms as drug allergy and, second, the identification of the eliciting drug. This is an often difficult task, as the clinical picture and underlying pathomechanisms are heterogeneous. In clinical routine, physicians frequently have to rely upon a suggestive history and eventual provocation tests, both having their specific limitations. For this reason both in vivo (skin tests) and in vitro tests are investigated intensively as tools to identify the disease-eliciting drug. One of the tests evaluated in drug allergy is the basophil activation test (BAT). Basophils with their high-affinity IgE receptors are easily accessible and therefore can be used as indicator cells for IgE-mediated reactions. Upon allergen challenge and cross-linking of membrane-bound IgE antibodies (via Fc-epsilon-RI) basophils up-regulate certain activation markers on their surface such as CD63 and CD203c, as well as intracellular markers (eg, phosphorylated p38MAPK). In BAT, these alterations can be detected rapidly on a single-cell basis by multicolor flow cytometry using specific monoclonal antibodies. Combining this technique with in vitro passive sensitization of donor basophils with patients' serum, one can prove the IgE dependence of a drug reaction. This article summarizes the authors' current experience with the BAT in the diagnostic management of immediate-type drug allergy mediated by drug-specific IgE antibodies.19562298
C5a-induced in vitro basophil activation in patients with chronic urticaria: a pilot study.
Korosec Peter, Subic Tjasa, Adamic Katja, Silar Mira, Kosnik Mitja
Wiener klinische Wochenschrift
Complement component 5a (C5a) might be involved in the formation of wheals in patients with chronic urticaria (CU). We sought to compare the in vitro responsiveness of basophils to C5a in patients with CU and in a control group.
Basophil surface expression of activation marker CD63 induced by C5a, anti-FcepsilonRI mAb or anti-IgE pAb was measured using flow cytometry in 17 patients with CU and in 10 healthy controls.
Patients with CU showed significantly greater basophil CD63 surface expression induced by C5a (median [interquartile range]; 16.4% [13-25.1]; P = 0.011) than the group of healthy controls (10.7% [7.2-16.8]). In contrast, basophil CD63 response to anti-IgE and anti-FcepsilonRI was lower in the CU group (12.3% [6-36.3]; 25.9% [12.5-60.5]) than in the control group (51.7% [6.7-84.3]; 62.1% [9.7-89.2]), although not statistically significant.
Results of this pilot study suggest that patients with CU might have an enhanced basophil response to stimulation with C5a, indicating that further studies in CU basophil responsiveness are needed.19549026
Basophil activation tests for the diagnosis of food allergy in children.
Ocmant A, Mulier S, Hanssens L, Goldman M, Casimir G, Mascart F, Schandené L
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Positive skin prick tests (SPT) for food allergens and specific IgE (sIgE) in serum indicate sensitization but do not enable distinction between sensitized but tolerant and clinically allergic patients.
Herein, we evaluate the clinical relevance of basophil activation tests (BATs) for peanut or egg allergy diagnosis.
Thirty-two peanut-allergic, 14 peanut-sensitized (sIgE(+) and/or SPT(+) to peanuts) but tolerant children and 29 controls with no history of an adverse reaction to peanuts were included. Similarly, 31 egg-allergic, 14 egg-sensitized children (sIgE(+) and/or SPT(+) to egg white) and 22 controls were studied. Flow cytometric analysis of CD63 expression or CD203c upregulation on basophils and the production of leukotrienes (LT) were performed in response to an in vitro crude peanut extract or ovalbumin (OVA) challenge.
After in vitro peanut challenge, the basophils from peanut-allergic children showed significantly higher levels of activation than those from controls (P<0.001). After OVA challenge, a similar distinction (P<0.001) was observed between egg-allergics and controls. Interestingly, the majority of egg- or peanut-sensitized children failed to activate basophils, respectively, in response to OVA and peanut challenge. The sensitivity of the CD63, CD203c and LT assay was 86.7%, 89.5% and 76.0% with a specificity of 94.1%, 97.1% and 94.6% for peanut allergy diagnosis. The corresponding performances of BATs applied to egg allergy diagnosis were 88.9%, 62.5% and 77.8% for the sensitivity and 100%, 96.4% and 96.4% for the specificity.
Neither conventional tests nor BATs are sensitive and specific enough to predict food allergy accurately. However, BATs may helpfully complete conventional tests, especially SPT, allowing improved discrimination between allergic and non-allergic individuals.19545676
Relationship between platelet activation and acute rejection after renal transplantation.
Zhang Y, Zhang X D, Ma L L, Guan D L
Transplantation proceedings
To provide an earlier diagnosis and efficiently treat acute rejection episodes (ARE) after renal transplantation, we studied its relationship to platelet activation.
The peripheral blood levels of platelet surface glycoprotein (CD61), platelet activation-dependent granule membrane protein (CD62p), lysosomal enzyme glycoprotein (CD63), macula densa granule membrane glycoprotein (CD42a), and fibrinogen receptor monoclonal antibody (PAC-1) among 203 patients with uremia in various stages before and after transplantation were assayed by flow cytometry. The patients with ARE were prospectively and randomly assigned to either a treatment group with an antiplatelet activation agent or a control group.
The incidence of ARE was remarkably increased among patients with greater expression levels of platelet activation markers in peripheral blood preoperatively. The values of platelet activation markers were significantly higher among patients with ARE compared with those showing either normal graft function or acute tubular necrosis. The greater the increase in CD63, the worse the ARE. The expression levels of platelet activation markers decreased remarkably among the group treated with a platelet activation inhibitor in addition to antirejection therapy: the rejection reversal time shortened and the dose of antihuman thymocyte globulin (ATG) was lower. The sensitivity of platelet activation markers was better than its specificity.
Our studies demonstrated an association between platelet activation and ARE after renal transplantation. Platelet activation before transplantation can predict the occurrence of ARE. Platelet activation inhibitor therapy after transplantation improved ARE reversal.19515805
Plasma markers of coagulation and endothelial activation in Fabry disease: impact of renal impairment.
Vedder Anouk C, Biró Eva, Aerts Johannes M F G, Nieuwland Rienk, Sturk Guus, Hollak Carla E M
Nephrology, dialysis, transplantation : official publication of the European Dialysis and Transplant Association - European Renal Association
In Fabry disease, storage of globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) in arterial walls is one of the main pathogenetic factors that are thought to underlie the clinical manifestations of the disease. Abnormalities of the vessel wall, haemodynamics and pro- and anticoagulant factors may play a role, though the exact pathophysiology is incompletely understood. In this study, we try to clarify inconsistencies regarding coagulation activation, fibrinolysis, platelet activation and endothelial activation in 36 patients with Fabry disease.
Cell-derived microparticles, markers for coagulation activation (F(1+2), TAT, sTF, sEPCR), fibrinolysis (D-dimer, tPA, alpha(2)-AP), platelet activation (beta-TG, PF4), endothelial activation (vWF) and acute phase response (IL-6, CRP) were studied in relation to renal function and severity of the disease and compared to data from 36 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (17 males).
Markers for endothelial activation and fibrinolysis were normal. Male patients had elevated levels of sTF and beta-TG, with an association between sTF and renal function and severity of the disease. In female patients, levels of TAT, beta-TG, PF4, CD63-positive platelet-derived microparticles and IL-6 were somewhat increased, with no correlation with renal function or disease severity.
Only minimal abnormalities in markers for platelet, endothelial activation and coagulation activation and fibrinolysis could be established in a large cohort of Fabry disease patients. The existing laboratory abnormalities are more likely related to renal insufficiency rather than to Fabry disease itself.19494523
Upregulation of CD63 or CD203c alone or in combination is not sensitive in the diagnosis of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug intolerance.
Bavbek Sevim, Ikincioğullari Aydan, Dursun A Berna, Guloğlu Deniz, Arikan Meltem, Elhan Atilla Halil, Misirligil Zeynep
International archives of allergy and immunology
The oral aspirin (ASA) provocation test is considered to be the gold standard in the diagnosis of ASA sensitivity. However, since it may be associated with severe adverse reactions, safer alternatives would be highly desirable. The basophil activation test has been proposed as such an alternative, but there is limited information about its usefulness. Our aim was to evaluate the clinical usefulness of flow cytometric basophil activation in the diagnosis of ASA sensitivity.
Patients with ASA sensitivity (n = 18), patients with ASA tolerance (n = 12) and healthy volunteers (n = 12) were included in the study. A 2-day single-blind placebo-controlled oral ASA provocation test was performed on all patients. Basophil activation after lysine-ASA and diclofenac stimulation was measured by Flow-CAST (Buhlmann Laboratories) for CD63 and an allergenicity kit (Beckman Coulter) for CD203c. The results of CD63 and CD203c were compared within groups, and sensitivity and specificity of the assay were measured against oral ASA provocation.
The highest sensitivity and specificity of CD63 were 33.3 and 79.2%, respectively, and of CD203c were 16.7 and 100%, respectively, for ASA. The highest sensitivity and specificity of CD63 were 16.7 and 91.7%, respectively, and of CD203c were 22.2 and 100%, respectively, fordiclofenac. Neither the addition of CD203c to CD63 nor the addition of diclofenac improves the overall sensitivity and specificity of CD63 to ASA.
At present, basophil activation using CD63 and CD203c does not seem to be optimally sensitive for the diagnosis of ASA sensitivity.
Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.19490536
Multivesicular endosome biogenesis in the absence of ESCRTs.
Stuffers Susanne, Sem Wegner Catherine, Stenmark Harald, Brech Andreas
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) protein machinery comprises four complexes, ESCRT-0, ESCRT-I, ESCRT-II and ESCRT-III, that facilitate receptor sorting into the lumen of multivesicular endosomes (MVEs) in order to terminate signalling receptors for final degradation within the lysosomes. Even though ESCRT proteins appear to be essential for the biogenesis of MVEs in Saccharomyces cerevisae, it is not clear whether ESCRT-independent pathways for MVE biogenesis exist in higher organisms. In this study we maximized inhibition of ESCRT-dependent pathway by depleting cells of key subunits of all four ESCRTs and followed MVE formation and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) traffic using electron and confocal microscopy. There was a dramatic alteration in the morphology of components of the endocytic pathway in ESCRT-depleted cells, but early and late endosomes stayed clearly differentiated. Importantly, although EGF-induced formation of MVEs was highly sensitive to ESCRT depletion, EGF-independent formation of MVEs could still occur. The MVEs remaining in ESCRT-depleted cells contained enlarged intralumenal vesicles into which EGFRs were not sorted. Our observations suggest that both ESCRT-dependent and ESCRT-independent mechanisms of MVE biogenesis exist in mammalian cells.19489128
Distinct roles for tetraspanins CD9, CD63 and CD81 in the formation of multinucleated giant cells.
Parthasarathy Varadarajan, Martin Francine, Higginbottom Adrian, Murray Helen, Moseley Gregory W, Read Robert C, Mal Gorakh, Hulme Rachel, Monk Peter N, Partridge Lynda J
Immunology
Members of the tetraspanin superfamily of proteins are implicated in a variety of complex cell processes including cell fusion. However, the contribution of individual tetraspanins to these processes has proved difficult to define. Here we report the use of recombinant extracellular regions of tetraspanins to investigate the role of specific members of this family in the fusion of monocytes to form multinucleated giant cells (MGC). In contrast to their positive requirement in sperm-egg fusion, previous studies using antibodies and knockout mice have indicated a negative regulatory role for tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 in this process. In an in vitro model of fusion using human monocytes, we have confirmed observations that antibodies to CD9 and CD81 enhance MGC formation; however, in contrast to previous investigations, we found that all members of a panel of antibodies to CD63 inhibited fusion. Moreover, recombinant proteins corresponding to the large extracellular domains (EC2s) of CD63 and CD9 inhibited MGC formation, whereas the EC2s of CD81 and CD151 had no effect. The potent inhibition of fusion and binding of labelled CD63 EC2 to monocytes under fusogenic conditions suggest a direct interaction with a membrane component required for fusion. Our findings indicate that the tetraspanins CD9, CD63 and CD81 are all involved in MGC formation, but play distinct roles.19486029
Effect of in vitro aspirin stimulation on basophils in patients with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease.
Celik G E, Schroeder J T, Hamilton R G, Saini S S, Adkinson N F
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Basophil activation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). However, a comprehensive analysis of basophil responses to aspirin in terms of mediator release, cytokine secretion and increased expression of surface activation markers has not been performed.
To study the in vitro effects of aspirin on the concurrent release of histamine, leukotriene C4 (LTC4) and IL-4 from human basophils and to also evaluate changes in surface activation markers (CD63, CD69 and CD203c) expressed by these cells.
Basophil-enriched cell suspensions from 10 patients with AERD and 10 healthy volunteers were incubated with lysine-aspirin for up to 3 h. Cells were analysed for expression of CD63, CD69 and CD203c using flow cytometry. Cell-free supernatants were evaluated for histamine, and LTC4 release and for IL-4 secretion.
Aspirin-induced expression of CD63, CD69 and CD203c yielded 30%, 80% and 70% sensitivity, respectively, but with poor specificity. There was no significant difference in LTC4 synthesis between groups. None of the patients with AERD (or controls) released IL-4 in response to aspirin. A higher dose of 5 mg/mL aspirin-mediated non-specific effects on basophils.
Basophil responses to in vitro aspirin challenge are poor indicators of clinical sensitivity. Aspirin activates some basophils by means of mechanisms that differ from the classical IgE-mediated pathway. Our study also shows that the use of 27 mm of aspirin (5 mg/mL) by previous investigators causes non-specific basophil activation, thereby eliminating its usefulness in a cell-based diagnostic test for AERD. Evaluation of in vitro basophil activation has low clinical value in identifying aspirin-induced respiratory reactions.19458002
Formation of syncytia is repressed by tetraspanins in human immunodeficiency virus type 1-producing cells.
Weng Jia, Krementsov Dimitry N, Khurana Sandhya, Roy Nathan H, Thali Markus
Journal of virology
In vitro propagation studies have established that human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is most efficiently transmitted at the virological synapse that forms between producer and target cells. Despite the presence of the viral envelope glycoprotein (Env) and CD4 and chemokine receptors at the respective surfaces, producer and target cells usually do not fuse with each other but disengage after the viral particles have been delivered, consistent with the idea that syncytia, at least in vitro, are not required for HIV-1 spread. Here, we tested whether tetraspanins, which are well known regulators of cellular membrane fusion processes that are enriched at HIV-1 exit sites, regulate syncytium formation. We found that overexpression of tetraspanins in producer cells leads to reduced syncytium formation, while downregulation has the opposite effect. Further, we document that repression of Env-induced cell-cell fusion by tetraspanins depends on the presence of viral Gag, and we demonstrate that fusion repression requires the recruitment of Env by Gag to tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs). However, sensitivity to fusion repression by tetraspanins varied for different viral strains, despite comparable recruitment of their Envs to TEMs. Overall, these data establish tetraspanins as negative regulators of HIV-1-induced cell-cell fusion, and they start delineating the requirements for this regulation.19445867
Diagnosing immune-mediated reactions to drugs.
Nagao-Dias A T, Teixeira F M, Coelho H L L
Allergologia et immunopathologia
Drug allergy is a type B adverse drug reaction, which is unpredictable and difficult to prevent or manage. In patients who have a previous history of drug allergy it must be confirmed by laboratorial diagnosis. However, the diagnostic test remains a major problem in clinical practice. Skin testing is validated for some drugs, such as penicillin, but not for others. Provocation test is a confirmatory test but bears the risk of severe reactions. Lymphocyte transformation test is a reliable test but is considered as a research tool. This review addresses the most recent published literature regarding the techniques which have already been developed as well as the new tests that can be promising alternatives for diagnosis of drug allergy.19432025
The basophil activation test in immediate drug allergy.
Ebo D G, Hagendorens M M, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Acta clinica Belgica
Diagnosis of drug allergy is not always straight forward for several reasons. First, a broad spectrum of drugs can elicit various immune-mediated diseases with distinct pathomechanism, secondly, although exact epitope identification is not mandatory for clinical diagnosis, the epitope that causes the reaction is frequently unknown, thirdly in vitro or in vivo test results might not be predictive of a clinical situation, and finally the gold standard or reference test for diagnosis, the drug challenge, is a complicated and sometimes dangerous endeavour. Upon challenge with specific allergens that cross-link membrane-bound IgE antibodies, basophils upregulate the expression of different activation markers such as CD63 and CD203c. These immunophenotypic alterations can be detected on a single-cell basis by multicolour flow cytometry using specific monoclonal antibodies in the basophil activation test (BAT). This review intends to summarise our current experience with the BAT in the diagnostic management of immediate-type allergy to drugs and related compounds that are generally (but not always) mediated by drug-specific IgE antibodies.19418203
Inhibition of CD203c membrane up-regulation in human basophils by high dilutions of histamine: a controlled replication study.
Chirumbolo Salvatore, Brizzi Maurizio, Ortolani Riccardo, Vella Antonio, Bellavite Paolo
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
Previous research suggests that human basophil activation may be inhibited by histamine even at extremely low doses (high dilutions). However, uncertainties about the nature of the phenomenon and its reproducibility mean that further, rigorously controlled studies are necessary.
Serial 1:100 (v:v) histamine dilutions (centesimal dilutions, C) and water controls were tested on human basophil responsiveness to anti-IgE antibodies, using flow cytometry. Each dilution step was followed by vertical mechanical shaking (also designed as succussion) at 20 strokes/s. Basophil-enriched buffy coats from healthy blood donors were incubated with 10(-4) mol/l histamine (2C) and with serially diluted preparations from 10(-20) mol/l (10C) to 10(-32) mol/l (16C), then incubated for 30 min with 1 mug/ml goat monoclonal anti-human IgE and basophils stained for immunophenotyping.
Membrane up-regulation of CD203c, which in these experimental conditions proved to be a more consistent activation marker than CD63, was significantly inhibited in samples treated with histamine at the dilutions of 2C (P = 0.001), 12C (P = 0.047), 14C (P = 0.003), 15C (P = 0.036) and 16C (P = 0.009). Control water dilutions/succussions did not show any significant effect.
Using a strictly standardized flow cytometry protocol and a new dilution/succussion procedure, we have shown that low and high dilutions of histamine inhibit CD203c up-regulation in anti-IgE stimulated basophils.19398958
Vesicle-mediated secretion of human eosinophil granule-derived major basic protein.
Melo Rossana C N, Spencer Lisa A, Perez Sandra A C, Neves Josiane S, Bafford Staci P, Morgan Ellen S, Dvorak Ann M, Weller Peter F
Laboratory investigation; a journal of technical methods and pathology
Major basic protein (MBP), the predominant cationic protein of human eosinophil specific granules, is stored within crystalloid cores of these granules. Secretion of MBP contributes to the immunopathogenesis of varied diseases. Prior electron microscopy (EM) of eosinophils in sites of inflammation noted losses of granule cores in the absence of granule exocytosis and suggested that eosinophil granule proteins might be released through piecemeal degranulation (PMD), a secretory process mediated by transport vesicles. Because release of eosinophil granule-derived MBP through PMD has not been studied, we evaluated secretion of this cationic protein by human eosinophils. Intracellular localizations of MBP were studied within nonstimulated and eotaxin-stimulated human eosinophils by both immunofluorescence and a pre-embedding immunonanogold EM method that enables optimal epitope preservation and antigen access to membrane microdomains. In parallel, quantification of transport vesicles was assessed in eosinophils from a patient with hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES). Our data demonstrate vesicular trafficking of MBP within eotaxin-stimulated eosinophils. Vesicular compartments, previously implicated in transport from granules to the plasma membrane, including large vesiculotubular carriers termed eosinophil sombrero vesicles (EoSVs), were found to contain MBP. These secretory compartments were significantly increased in numbers within HES eosinophils. Moreover, in addition to granule-stored MBP, even unstimulated eosinophils contained appreciable amounts of MBP within secretory vesicles, as evidenced by immunonanogold EM and immunofluorescent colocalizations of MBP and CD63. These data suggest that eosinophil MBP, with its multiple extracellular activities, can be mobilized from granules by PMD into secretory vesicles and both granule- and secretory vesicle-stored pools of MBP are available for agonist-elicited secretion of MBP from human eosinophils. The recognition of PMD as a secretory process to release MBP is important to understand the pathological basis of allergic and other eosinophil-associated inflammatory diseases.19387466
Involvement of mast cells by the malignant process in patients with Philadelphia chromosome negative myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Wang J, Ishii T, Zhang W, Sozer S, Dai Y, Mascarenhas J, Najfeld V, Zhao Z J, Hoffman R, Wisch N, Xu M
Leukemia
The Philadelphia chromosome negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal hematologic malignancies frequently characterized by a mutation in JAK2 (JAK2V617F). Peripheral blood (PB) CD34(+) cells from patients with polycythemia vera (PV) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF) generated in vitro significantly fewer mast cells (MCs) than normal PB CD34(+) cells. The numbers of MC progenitors assayed from MPN CD34(+) cells were, however, similar to that assayed from normal CD34(+) cells. A higher percentage of the cultured MPN MCs expressed FcvarepsilonRIalpha, CD63 and CD69 than normal MCs, suggesting that cultured MPN MCs are associated with an increased state of MC activation. Further analysis showed that a higher proportion of cultured PV and PMF MCs underwent apoptosis in vitro. By using JAK2V617F, MplW515L and chromosomal abnormalities as clonality markers, we showed that the malignant process involved MPN MCs. JAK2V617F-positive MC colonies were assayable from the PB CD34(+) cells of each of the 17 JAK2V617F positive MPN patients studied. Furthermore, erlotinib, a JAK2 inhibitor, was able to inhibit JAK2V617F-positive PV MC progenitor cells, indicating that malignant MC progenitor cells are a potential cellular target for such JAK2 inhibitor-directed therapy.19383316
Gene expression signature associated with BRAF mutations in human primary cutaneous melanomas.
Kannengiesser Caroline, Spatz Alain, Michiels Stefan, Eychène Alain, Dessen Philippe, Lazar Vladimir, Winnepenninckx Véronique, Lesueur Fabienne, Druillennec Sabine, Robert Caroline, van den Oord Joost J, Sarasin Alain, Bressac-de Paillerets Brigitte, None None
Molecular oncology
With the aim to correlate BRAF mutation status with gene expression in human primary cutaneous melanomas, and thus to get more insight on the consequences of BRAF mutation on cell biology, we analyzed all expression data obtained in melanomas from which DNA was extracted from the same tissue slides that were used for the expression study. A cohort of 69 frozen primary melanoma whose oligonucleotide micro-array expression data were available, were genotyped for BRAF and NRAS genes. The expression data from these melanomas were re-analyzed according to BRAF mutational status. A set of 250 probes representing 209 genes that were significantly (raw P< or =0.001) associated with BRAF mutation status was identified and 17 of these were previously shown to be implicated in cutaneous melanoma progression or pigmentation pathway-associated genes driven by the microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF). The list of 34 top probes contained no more than 1% of false discoveries with a probability of 0.95. Among the genes that differentiated most strongly between BRAF mutated and non-mutated melanomas, there were those involved in melanoma immune response such as MAGE-D2, CD63, and HSP70. These findings support the immunogenicity of BRAF(V600E), eliciting patients T-cell responses in various in vitro assays. The genes whose expression is associated with BRAF mutations are not simply restricted to the MAPK/ERK signaling but also converge to enhanced immune responsiveness, cell motility and melanosomes processing involved in the adaptative UV response.19382185
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from diesel emissions exert proallergic effects in birch pollen allergic individuals through enhanced mediator release from basophils.
Lubitz Stefanie, Schober Wolfgang, Pusch Gudrun, Effner Renate, Klopp Norman, Behrendt Heidrun, Buters Jeroen T M
Environmental toxicology
Diesel exhaust particles (DEPs) act as adjuvants in the immune system and contribute to the increased prevalence and morbidity of asthma and allergic rhinitis. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are major components of DEPs, which may be involved in the induction and enhancement of proallergic processes. In this study we explored adjuvant effects of DEP-PAHs on activation parameters of human basophils, fostering allergic inflammation through the release of preformed or granule-derived mediators.
Heparinized blood samples from birch pollen allergic and control donors were stimulated with Bet v 1, the major allergen of birch pollen grains, alone or together with a mixture of 16 environmental prominent PAHs (EPA-PAH standard). Flow cytometric analysis was performed for quantitative determination of PAH-enhanced basophil activation. To assess direct PAH effects on basophils, enriched cultures from both donor groups were exposed to benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) or phenanthrene (Phe), two major DEP-PAHs, with and without allergen. Supernatants were assayed for IL-4 and IL-8 secretion and histamine release by means of ELISA.
At environmental relevant exposure levels EPA-PAH standard synergized with antigen and significantly enhanced basophil activation of all birch pollen allergic individuals up to 95%. Single PAHs significantly drove IL-8 secretion from sensitized basophils of all patients tested, and there was no further enhancement by addition of rBet v 1. B[a]P and Phe also significantly induced IL-4 secretion, a key factor for Th2 development, from purified sensitized basophils in the absence of antigen suggesting an adjuvant role of DEP-PAHs in allergic sensitization. None of the basophil samples from healthy controls showed any PAH effect on mediator release.
DEP-PAHs exert proallergic effects on sensitized basophils in an allergen independent fashion, suggesting a potential role of these pollutants for the allergic breakthrough in atopic individuals, who have not developed an allergic disease yet.19381331
High levels of exosomes expressing CD63 and caveolin-1 in plasma of melanoma patients.
Logozzi Mariantonia, De Milito Angelo, Lugini Luana, Borghi Martina, Calabrò Luana, Spada Massimo, Perdicchio Maurizio, Marino Maria Lucia, Federici Cristina, Iessi Elisabetta, Brambilla Daria, Venturi Giulietta, Lozupone Francesco, Santinami Mario, Huber Veronica, Maio Michele, Rivoltini Licia, Fais Stefano
PloS one
Metastatic melanoma is an untreatable cancer lacking reliable and non-invasive markers of disease progression. Exosomes are small vesicles secreted by normal as well as tumor cells. Human tumor-derived exosomes are involved in malignant progression and we evaluated the presence of exosomes in plasma of melanoma patients as a potential tool for cancer screening and follow-up.
We designed an in-house sandwich ELISA (Exotest) to capture and quantify exosomes in plasma based on expression of housekeeping proteins (CD63 and Rab-5b) and a tumor-associated marker (caveolin-1). Western blot and flow cytometry analysis of exosomes were used to confirm the Exotest-based findings. The Exotest allowed sensitive detection and quantification of exosomes purified from human tumor cell culture supernatants and plasma from SCID mice engrafted with human melanoma. Plasma levels of exosomes in melanoma-engrafted SCID mice correlated to tumor size. We evaluated the levels of plasma exosomes expressing CD63 and caveolin-1 in melanoma patients (n = 90) and healthy donors (n = 58). Consistently, plasma exosomes expressing CD63 (504+/-315) or caveolin-1 (619+/-310) were significantly increased in melanoma patients as compared to healthy donors (223+/-125 and 228+/-102, respectively). While the Exotest for CD63+ plasma exosomes had limited sensitivity (43%) the Exotest for detection of caveolin-1+ plasma exosomes showed a higher sensitivity (68%). Moreover, caveolin-1+ plasma exosomes were significantly increased with respect to CD63+ exosomes in the patients group.
We describe a new non-invasive assay allowing detection and quantification of human exosomes in plasma of melanoma patients. Our results suggest that the Exotest for detection of plasma exosomes carrying tumor-associated antigens may represent a novel tool for clinical management of cancer patients.19369333
Simultaneous cell-to-cell transmission of human immunodeficiency virus to multiple targets through polysynapses.
Rudnicka Dominika, Feldmann Jérôme, Porrot Françoise, Wietgrefe Steve, Guadagnini Stéphanie, Prévost Marie-Christine, Estaquier Jérôme, Haase Ashley T, Sol-Foulon Nathalie, Schwartz Olivier
Journal of virology
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) efficiently propagates through cell-to-cell contacts, which include virological synapses (VS), filopodia, and nanotubes. Here, we quantified and characterized further these diverse modes of contact in lymphocytes. We report that viral transmission mainly occurs across VS and through "polysynapses," a rosette-like structure formed between one infected cell and multiple adjacent recipients. Polysynapses are characterized by simultaneous HIV clustering and transfer at multiple membrane regions. HIV Gag proteins often adopt a ring-like supramolecular organization at sites of intercellular contacts and colocalize with CD63 tetraspanin and raft components GM1, Thy-1, and CD59. In donor cells engaged in polysynapses, there is no preferential accumulation of Gag proteins at contact sites facing the microtubule organizing center. The LFA-1 adhesion molecule, known to facilitate viral replication, enhances formation of polysynapses. Altogether, our results reveal an underestimated mode of viral transfer through polysynapses. In HIV-infected individuals, these structures, by promoting concomitant infection of multiple targets in the vicinity of infected cells, may facilitate exponential viral growth and escape from immune responses.19367702
Characterization and comprehensive proteome profiling of exosomes secreted by hepatocytes.
Conde-Vancells Javier, Rodriguez-Suarez Eva, Embade Nieves, Gil David, Matthiesen Rune, Valle Mikel, Elortza Felix, Lu Shelly C, Mato Jose M, Falcon-Perez Juan M
Journal of proteome research
Exosomes represent a discrete population of vesicles that are secreted from various cell types to the extracellular media. Their protein and lipid composition are a consequence of sorting events at the level of the multivesicular body, a central organelle which integrates endocytic and secretory pathways. Characterization of exosomes from different biological samples has shown the presence of common as well as cell-type specific proteins. Remarkably, the protein content of the exosomes is modified upon pathological or stress conditions. Hepatocytes play a central role in the body response to stress metabolizing potentially harmful endogenous substances as well as xenobiotics. In the present study, we described and characterized for the first time exosome secretion in nontumoral hepatocytes, and with the use of a systematic proteomic approach, we establish the first extensive proteome of a hepatocyte-derived exosome population which should be useful in furthering our understanding of the hepatic function and in the identification of components that may serve as biomarkers for hepatic alterations. Our analysis identifies a significant number of proteins previously described among exosomes derived from others cell types as well as proteins involved in metabolizing lipoproteins, endogenous compounds and xenobiotics, not previously described in exosomes. Furthermore, we demonstrated that exosomal membrane proteins can constitute an interesting tool to express nonexosomal proteins into exosomes with therapeutic purposes.19348919
Allergen-specific basophil suppression associated with clinical tolerance in patients with milk allergy.
Wanich Niya, Nowak-Wegrzyn Anna, Sampson Hugh A, Shreffler Wayne G
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Children with milk allergy who tolerate heat-denatured milk (HM) have less severe reactions and outgrow the condition earlier than those who react to HM, which might be related to differences in IgE-dependent effector cell function.
We sought to apply a novel assay to test the hypothesis that HM-tolerant children have suppressed IgE-mediated basophil responses.
Allergic, HM-tolerant, outgrown, or control subjects were defined based on oral food challenges. Whole blood cells were stimulated in vitro with a range of milk allergen doses in the presence or absence of autologous serum or with dilutions of autologous serum. Activated basophils were identified by means of flow cytometry as CD63(bright)CD123+CD203c+HLA-DR(-)CD41a(-).
HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly less responsive to milk allergen stimulation at all doses than were basophils from HM-reactive (allergic) individuals. In the absence of autologous serum, HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly more reactive at low allergen concentrations. To a lesser extent, autologous serum also inhibited IL-3- and anti-IgE-induced, but not N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine-induced, responses. The allergen-specific responsiveness of HM-tolerant subjects' basophils increased with dilution of autologous serum with normal pooled serum.
Children with milk allergy with a favorable prognosis have evidence of extrinsically suppressed allergen-specific effector cell reactivity.19345684
Transport of mannose-6-phosphate receptors from the trans-Golgi network to endosomes requires Rab31.
Rodriguez-Gabin A G, Yin X, Si Q, Larocca J N
Experimental cell research
Rab31, a protein that we originally cloned from a rat oligodendrocyte cDNA library, localizes in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and endosomes. However, its function has not yet been established. Here we show the involvement of Rab31 in the transport of mannose 6-phosphate receptors (MPRs) from TGN to endosomes. We demonstrate the specific sorting of cation-dependent-MPR (CD-MPR), but not CD63 and vesicular stomatitis virus G (VSVG) protein, to Rab31-containing trans-Golgi network carriers. CD-MPR and Rab31 containing carriers originate from extending TGN tubules that also contain clathrin and GGA1 coats. Expression of constitutively active Rab31 reduced the content of CD-MPR in the TGN relative to that of endosomes, while expression of dominant negative Rab31 triggered reciprocal changes in CD-MPR distribution. Expression of dominant negative Rab31 also inhibited the formation of carriers containing CD-MPR in the TGN, without affecting the exit of VSVG from this compartment. Importantly, siRNA-mediated depletion of endogenous Rab31 caused the collapse of the Golgi apparatus. Our observations demonstrate that Rab31 is required for transport of MPRs from TGN to endosomes and for the Golgi/TGN organization.19330835
Tetraspanin gene expression levels as potential biomarkers for malignancy of gingival squamous cell carcinoma.
Hirano Chizuru, Nagata Masaki, Noman Arhab A, Kitamura Nobutaka, Ohnishi Makoto, Ohyama Tokio, Kobayashi Takanori, Suzuki Kenji, Yoshizawa Michiko, Izumi Naoya, Fujita Hajime, Takagi Ritsuo
International journal of cancer. Journal international du cancer
Accurate assessment of malignancy in oral squamous cell carcinoma is essential to optimize treatment planning. To detect a biomarker related to malignant propensity in gingival squamous cell carcinoma (GSCC), quantitative gene expression analysis of tetraspanin family genes was conducted. In 73 cases of GSCC, total RNA was extracted from carcinoma tissues, and gene expression was analyzed by quantitative real time-PCR. Six tetraspanin family genes (CD9, CD63, CD81, CD82, CD151, NAG-2) were investigated. Housekeeping genes (ACTB and GAPDH), anchor protein genes (JUP and PXN) and an integrin gene (ITGA3) were used as reference genes. Forty-five gene expression ratios were calculated from these 11 gene expression levels and were analyzed with clinical parameters using multivariate statistical methods. According to the results of the logistic regression analysis subjecting cervical lymph node metastasis as a target variable, CD9/ACTB (p = 0.013) or CD9/CD82 (p = 0.013) in addition to tumor size (p = 0.028) were detected as significant factors. In Cox proportional hazards regression analysis, delayed cervical lymph node metastasis (p = 0.039) and tumor cell positive surgical margin (p = 0.032) in addition to CD151/GAPDH (p = 0.024) were detected as significant factors for death outcome. A Kaplan-Meier survival curve presented a significantly lower survival rate of the group with a CD151/GAPDH value of 10 or more (log rank and generalized Wilcoxon tests: p = 0.0003). Results of this study present the usefulness of CD9 and CD151 expression levels as biomarkers for assessment of malignancy in GSCC. They also indicate that detection of residual tumor cells at the surgical margin and the biological malignancy of a tumor interdependently affects prognosis.
Copyright 2008 UICC.19328806
Subcellular fractionation of human eosinophils: isolation of functional specific granules on isoosmotic density gradients.
Neves Josiane S, Perez Sandra A C, Spencer Lisa A, Melo Rossana C N, Weller Peter F
Journal of immunological methods
Subcellular fractionation has been an important tool in investigating human eosinophil structure and function, including localizing of cytokine/chemokines within granules, investigating granule protein translocation and intracellular transport during eosinophil secretion, and studying secretory mechanisms of granules. The resolution of organelles obtained by subcellular fractionation was improved considerably after the introduction of nonionic iodinated density-gradient metrizamide and Nycodenz media that, unlike sucrose, exhibit relatively low tonicity throughout the gradient. However, the structure and membrane preservation of isolated organelles were still compromised due to the lack of gradient isoosmolarity. This paper describes a detailed protocol of subcellular fractionation of nitrogen cavitated eosinophils on an isoosmotic iodinated density gradient (iodixanol - OptiPrep) and the isolation of well preserved and functional membrane-bound specific granules.19297499
Evidence that productive human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly can occur in an intracellular compartment.
Joshi Anjali, Ablan Sherimay D, Soheilian Ferri, Nagashima Kunio, Freed Eric O
Journal of virology
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) assembly occurs predominantly at the plasma membrane of infected cells. The targeting of assembly to intracellular compartments such as multivesicular bodies (MVBs) generally leads to a significant reduction in virus release efficiency, suggesting that MVBs are a nonproductive site for HIV-1 assembly. In the current study, we make use of an HIV-1 Gag-matrix mutant, 29/31KE, that is MVB targeted. We previously showed that this mutant is severely defective for virus particle production in HeLa cells but more modestly affected in primary macrophages. To more broadly examine the consequences of MVB targeting for virus production, we investigated 29/31KE particle production in a range of cell types. Surprisingly, this mutant supported highly efficient assembly and release in T cells despite its striking MVB Gag localization. Manipulation of cellular endocytic pathways revealed that unlike Vpu-defective HIV-1, which demonstrated intracellular Gag localization as a result of Gag endocytosis from the plasma membrane, 29/31KE mutant Gag was targeted directly to an MVB compartment. The 29/31KE mutant was unable to support multiple-round replication; however, this defect could be reversed by truncating the cytoplasmic tail of the transmembrane envelope glycoprotein gp41 and by the acquisition of a 16EK change in matrix. The 16EK/29/31KE matrix mutant replicated efficiently in the MT-4 T-cell line despite maintaining an MVB-targeting phenotype. These results indicate that MVB-targeted Gag can be efficiently released from T cells and primary macrophages, suggesting that under some circumstances, late endosomal compartments can serve as productive sites for HIV-1 assembly in these physiologically relevant cell types.19284574
A role for CD81 on the late steps of HIV-1 replication in a chronically infected T cell line.
Grigorov Boyan, Attuil-Audenis Valérie, Perugi Fabien, Nedelec Martine, Watson Sarah, Pique Claudine, Darlix Jean-Luc, Conjeaud Hélène, Muriaux Delphine
Retrovirology
HIV-1 uses cellular co-factors for virion formation and release. The virus is able to incorporate into the viral particles host cellular proteins, such as tetraspanins which could serve to facilitate HIV-1 egress. Here, we investigated the implication of several tetraspanins on HIV-1 formation and release in chronically infected T-lymphoblastic cells, a model that permits the study of the late steps of HIV-1 replication.
Our data revealed that HIV-1 Gag and Env structural proteins co-localized with tetraspanins in the form of clusters. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that Gag proteins interact, directly or indirectly, with CD81, and less with CD82, in tetraspanin-enriched microdomains composed of CD81/CD82/CD63. In addition, when HIV-1 producing cells were treated with anti-CD81 antibodies, or upon CD81 silencing by RNA interference, HIV-1 release was significantly impaired, and its infectivity was modulated. Finally, CD81 downregulation resulted in Gag redistribution at the cell surface.
Our findings not only extend the notion that HIV-1 assembly can occur on tetraspanin-enriched microdomains in T cells, but also highlight a critical role for the tetraspanin CD81 on the late steps of HIV replication.19271127
Use of basophil sensitivity not reactivity as a good marker for allergy diagnosis.
Sainte-Laudy J, Touraine F
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
19258324
Differential effect of extracellular acidosis on the release and dispersal of soluble and membrane proteins secreted from the Weibel-Palade body.
Babich Victor, Knipe Laura, Hewlett Lindsay, Meli Athinoula, Dempster John, Hannah Matthew J, Carter Tom
The Journal of biological chemistry
Proteins secreted from Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs) play important roles in regulating inflammatory and hemostatic responses. Inflammation is associated with the extracellular acidification of tissues and blood, conditions that can alter the behavior of secreted proteins. The effect of extracellular pH (pH(o)) on the release of von Willebrand factor (VWF), the VWF-propolypeptide (Proregion), interleukin-8, eotaxin-3, P-selectin, and CD63 from WPBs was investigated using biochemical approaches and by direct optical analysis of individual WPB fusion events in human endothelial cells expressing green or red fluorescent fusions of these different cargo proteins. Between pH(o) 7.4 and 7.0, ionomycin-evoked WPB exocytosis was characterized by the adhesion of VWF to the cell surface and the formation of long filamentous strands. The rapid dispersal of Proregion, interleukin-8, and eotaxin-3 into solution, and of P-selectin and CD63 into the plasma membrane, was unaltered over this pH(o) range. At pH(o) 6.8 or lower, Proregion remained associated with VWF, in many cases WPB failed to collapse fully and VWF failed to form filamentous strands. At pH(o) 6.5 dispersal of interleukin-8, eotaxin-3, and the membrane protein CD63 remained unaltered compared with that at pH(o) 7.4; however, P-selectin dispersal into the plasma membrane was significantly slowed. Thus, extracellular acidification to levels of pH(o) 6.8 or lower significantly alters the behavior of secreted VWF, Proregion, and P-selectin while rapid release of the small pro-inflammatory mediators IL-8 and eotaxin-3 is essentially unaltered. Together, these data suggest that WPB exocytosis during extracellular acidosis may favor the control of inflammatory processes.19243362
The basophil activation test in the diagnosis of allergy: technical issues and critical factors.
Sturm G J, Kranzelbinder B, Sturm E M, Heinemann A, Groselj-Strele A, Aberer W
Allergy
The basophil activation test (BAT) is a widely validated and reliable tool especially for the diagnosis of hymenoptera venom allergy. Nevertheless, several pitfalls have to be considered and outcomes may differ because of diverse in-house protocols and commercially available kits. We aimed to identify the factors that may influence results of the CD63-based BAT.
Basophil responses to monoclonal anti-IgE (clone E124.2.8) and bee and wasp venom were determined by BAT based on CD63. The effect of stimulating factors such as, IL-3, cytochalasin B and prewarming of the samples was investigated. Furthermore, we compared two different flow cytometer systems and evaluated the influence of storage time, different staining protocols and anti-allergic drugs on the test results.
Interleukin-3 enhanced the reactivity of basophils at 300 pM, but not at 75 and 150 pM. Prewarming of samples and reagents did not affect basophil reactivity. CD63 expression assayed after storage time of up to 48 h showed that basophil reactivity already started to decline after 4 h. Basophils stained with HLA-DR-PC5 and CD123-PE antibodies gated as HLA-DR(neg)/CD123(pos) cells showed the highest reactivity. No effect on test outcomes was observed at therapeutic doses of dimetindene and desloratadine. Finally, slight differences in the percentage of activated basophils, depending on the cytometer system used, were found.
Basophil activation test should be performed as early as possible after taking the blood sample, preferably within 4 h. In contrast to the skin test, BAT can be performed in patients undergoing treatment with antihistamines. For reasons of multiple influencing factors, BAT should be performed only at validated laboratories.19233449
Levels and value of platelet activation markers in different subtypes of acute non-cardio-embolic ischemic stroke.
Tsai Nai-Wen, Chang Wen-Neng, Shaw Chen-Fu, Jan Chung-Ren, Chang Hsueh-Wen, Huang Chi-Ren, Chen Shang-Der, Chuang Yao-Chung, Lee Lian-Hui, Wang Hung-Chen, Lee Tsong-Hai, Lu Cheng-Hsien
Thrombosis research
Platelet activation and its interaction with leukocytes are important in the pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. This study aimed to evaluate the value of platelet activation and platelet-leukocyte interaction in different subtypes of acute, non-cardio-embolic ischemic stroke.
Fifty-four patients with acute, non-cardio-embolic ischemic stroke, including 32 small-vessel and 22 large-vessel diseases, were evaluated. Platelet activation markers (CD62P, CD63, and CD40L) and platelet-leukocyte interaction were measured by flow cytometry at different time points (<48 hours and Days 7, 30, and 90 post-ischemic stroke). Markers were also evaluated in 28 other stroke patients in the convalescent stage (3 to 9 months after acute stroke) and in 28 control subjects.
Patients with ischemic stroke had significantly increased circulating CD62P, CD63, platelet-monocyte interaction, and platelet-lymphocyte interaction in the acute stage compared with the convalescent stage and control groups. Levels of CD62P and CD63 were significantly higher in the large-vessel disease group than in the small-vessel disease group, and differences in CD62P were significant even at one month. The CD40L level in the poor outcome group was significantly higher than that in the good outcome group. Stroke patients with diabetes mellitus and large-vessel disease were associated with poor outcome.
Patients with large-vessel cerebral infarction elicit higher platelet activation and platelet-leukocyte interaction compared to small-vessel infarction. Further large scale trials are warranted to evaluate the relationship between platelet activation markers and outcome in stroke patients under different anti-platelet therapies, and to clarify optimal treatment.19225250
[The effect of statin treatment on inflammation in patients with metabolic syndrome].
Aydin Mustafa, Onuk Tolga, Doğan Sait Mesut, Yildirim Nesligül, Demirci Erkan, Kalaycioğlu Ezgi, Madak Hediye, Aktop Ziyaettin, Ali Cetiner Mehmet, Sayin Muhammet Raşit, Karaaslan Sibel
Türk Kardiyoloji Derneği arşivi : Türk Kardiyoloji Derneğinin yayın organıdır
Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of metabolic syndrome (MS). We investigated the effect of fluvastatin treatment on inflammatory markers in patients with MS.
The study included 47 patients (36 females; 11 males; mean age 55+/-8 years) with MS. The diagnosis of MS was based on the presence of at least three criteria of the NCEP ATP III guidelines. All the patients received 80 mg fluvastatin treatment for six weeks. Laboratory parameters were measured before and after treatment, and flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood leukocytes was performed. The results were compared with those of 47 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (33 females, 14 males; mean age 52+/-8 years).
Fluvastatin treatment resulted in significant decreases in levels of total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglyceride (p<0.005), and C-reactive protein (p<0.05). Thirty-three patients (70.2%) had insulin resistance, which remained unchanged following treatment. Flow cytometric analysis after treatment showed significant decreases in total lymphocytes, and in surface antigens of CD16+56 and CD8+(CD28+) on leukocytes, CD11c on granulocytes, and a significant increase in the CD4/CD8 ratio (p<0.05). Compared to the control group, the mean baseline values of fluorescence density (FD) of CD14, CD11b, CD11c, and CD63 on monocytes, and CD11b and CD11c on granulocytes were significantly higher in patients with MS (p<0.05). Following fluvastatin treatment, there were significant decreases in the mean FD of CD3 on lymphocytes, and of CD11b and CD11c on both monocytes and granulocytes (p<0.05); of these, all FD values were similar to those in the control group (p>0.05).
Our data demonstrate that inflammation may have a significant role in the pathogenesis of MS and that this effect can be controlled with statin treatment.19198600
Intercellular transfer to signalling endosomes regulates an ex vivo bone marrow niche.
Gillette Jennifer M, Larochelle Andre, Dunbar Cynthia E, Lippincott-Schwartz Jennifer
Nature cell biology
Haematopoietic stem-progenitor cells (HSPCs) reside in the bone marrow niche, where interactions with osteoblasts provide essential cues for their proliferation and survival. Here, we use live-cell imaging to characterize both the site of contact between osteoblasts and haematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) and events at this site that result in downstream signalling responses important for niche maintenance. HPCs made prolonged contact with the osteoblast surface through a specialized membrane domain enriched in prominin 1, CD63 and rhodamine PE. At the contact site, portions of the specialized domain containing these molecules were taken up by the osteoblast and internalized into SARA-positive signalling endosomes. This caused osteoblasts to downregulate Smad signalling and increase production of stromal-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), a chemokine responsible for HSPC homing to bone marrow. These findings identify a mechanism involving intercellular transfer to signalling endosomes for targeted regulation of signalling and remodelling events within an ex vivo osteoblastic niche.19192119
The association of depression with platelet activation: evidence for a treatment effect.
Morel-Kopp M-C, McLean L, Chen Q, Tofler G H, Tennant C, Maddison V, Ward C M
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
Depression is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Although the mechanism is uncertain, prothrombotic and inflammatory factors may play a role.
As platelets play a key role in CVD, we determined first, whether depressed individuals had more activated platelets than non-depressed individuals and second, whether treatment of depression reduced platelet activation levels.
We recruited 108 depressed outpatients and 45 control subjects all without a history of CVD. After psychological assessment, the depressed patients were offered treatment with medication and/or psychotherapy. Flow cytometric markers of platelet activation and level of depression were assessed at baseline and at 4 weeks and 6 months after treatment.
Depression was associated with increased platelet activation with a higher number of circulating CD62p (0.76x10(9) L(-1) vs. 0.46, P=0.019) and CD63 (P=0.05) positive platelets compared with controls. Patients with depression also had more circulating platelet-leukocyte aggregates than controls (P<0.001). There was a positive correlation between the severity of depression and the level of platelet activation. Platelets from depressed patients were also hyperreactive to adenosine 5 -diphosphate (ADP) stimulation with increased CD62p and CD63 exposure (P=0.003 and 0.019, respectively). Six months of treatment resulted in a reduced number of circulating CD62p and CD63 positive platelets (29.84% and 53.38% decrease) and a 20.9% reduction in CD63 exposure after ADP activation.
Depression is associated with increased in vivo platelet activation and resolution of depression using psychotherapy and/or medication reduces platelet activation. These findings provide insights into the link between depression and cardiovascular risk.19190083
Characterization of exosome-like vesicles released from human tracheobronchial ciliated epithelium: a possible role in innate defense.
Kesimer Mehmet, Scull Margaret, Brighton Brian, DeMaria Genevieve, Burns Kimberlie, O'Neal Wanda, Pickles Raymond J, Sheehan John K
FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
Airway mucus forms the structural basis of the local innate immune defense mechanism. It is an integrated, active, viscoelastic gel matrix evolved to protect the exposed lung from physical, chemical, and pathological erosion. Exosomes are biologically active vesicles secreted by different cell types including epithelial, hematopoietic, and some tumor cells. They are also present in some biological fluids such as serum, urine, breast milk, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that exosome-like vesicles with antiviral properties are present in human tracheobronchial epithelial (HTBE) cell culture secretions. These vesicles have been isolated by differential centrifugation and are characterized further by mass spectrometry, flow cytometry, immunoblotting, electron microscopy, and light-scattering methods. HTBE vesicles exhibited characteristic exosomal size (30-100 nm) and morphology (cup-shaped) with a buoyant density in sucrose of 1.12-1.18 g/ml. Biochemical characterization further revealed typical surface, cytoskeletal, and cytoplasmic proteins characteristic of exosomes, including the multivesicular and late endosomal membrane markers Tsg101 and CD63. The presence of RNA was also observed. The epithelial mucins MUC1, MUC4, and MUC16 also contributed to the vesicles' structure. Notably, alpha-2,6-linked sialic acid was associated with these mucin molecules and subsequent functional analysis showed that these vesicles have a neutralizing effect on human influenza virus, which is known to bind sialic acid. Taken together, these findings suggest that airway epithelial cells release exosome-like vesicles and that these structures may be involved in diverse physiological processes in airway biology, including innate mucosal defense.19152193
Does CD10 immunoexpression have a diagnostic utility in the differential diagnosis of renal oncocytomas and eosinophilic variants of chromophobe renal cell carcinomas?
Mete Ozgur, Kilicaslan Isin, Uysal Veli
Pathology
19132251
Platelet surface P-selectin expression is highly correlated with serotonin transporter density in human subjects.
Frankhauser Pascal, Baranyai Reka, Ahrens Thorben, Schloss Patrick, Deuschle Michael, Lederbogen Florian
Thrombosis and haemostasis
19124833
p21-activated kinase regulates mast cell degranulation via effects on calcium mobilization and cytoskeletal dynamics.
Allen Jayme D, Jaffer Zahara M, Park Su-Jung, Burgin Sarah, Hofmann Clemens, Sells Mary Ann, Chen Shi, Derr-Yellin Ethel, Michels Elizabeth G, McDaniel Andrew, Bessler Waylan K, Ingram David A, Atkinson Simon J, Travers Jeffrey B, Chernoff Jonathan, Clapp D Wade
Blood
Mast cells are key participants in allergic diseases via activation of high-affinity IgE receptors (FcepsilonRI) resulting in release of proinflammatory mediators. The biochemical pathways linking IgE activation to calcium influx and cytoskeletal changes required for intracellular granule release are incompletely understood. We demonstrate, genetically, that Pak1 is required for this process. In a passive cutaneous anaphylaxis experiment, W(sh)/W(sh) mast cell-deficient mice locally reconstituted with Pak1(-/-) bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) experienced strikingly decreased allergen-induced vascular permeability compared with controls. Consistent with the in vivo phenotype, Pak1(-/-) BMMCs exhibited a reduction in FcepsilonRI-induced degranulation. Further, Pak1(-/-) BMMCs demonstrated diminished calcium mobilization and altered depolymerization of cortical filamentous actin (F-actin) in response to FcepsilonRI stimulation. These data implicate Pak1 as an essential molecular target for modulating acute mast cell responses that contribute to allergic diseases.19123441
Diagnosis of clavulanic acid allergy using basophil activation and leukotriene release by basophils.
Longo N, Gamboa P M, Gastaminza G, Audícana M T, Antepara I, Jaúregui I, Sanz M L
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
Clavulanic acid is a potent inhibitor of B-lactamase that is increasingly prescribed in association with amoxicillin. We report 2 cases of patients who experienced pruritus, wheals, and angioedema after oral intake of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. Routine skin tests for B-lactam antibiotics and specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E were negative in both patients. Analysis of CD63 expression by the basophil activation test (BAT) using flow cytometry and of sulphidoleukotriene (sLT) release by basophils using the cellular allergen stimulation test (CAST) revealed significant positive responses with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and with clavulanic acid, and negative responses with amoxicillin and other beta-lactam antibiotics. In addition, cultured CD3+CD4+ cells showed a significant increase in the expression of CD69, CD25, and HLA-DR in the presence of clavulanic acid. Both patients tolerated therapeutic doses of amoxicillin. BAT and CAST are useful ex vivo procedures for the detection of specific IgE-mediated allergy to clavulanic acid, especially for patients with negative skin test results.19111134
[Effects of Xuebijing injection on platelet membrane glycoprotein CD62P and CD63 in septic rats].
Zheng Gui-Jun, Wu Zi-Xia, Li Yin-Ping, Yao Yong-Ming
Zhongguo wei zhong bing ji jiu yi xue = Chinese critical care medicine = Zhongguo weizhongbing jijiuyixue
19097165
Amelogenin in cranio-facial development: the tooth as a model to study the role of amelogenin during embryogenesis.
Gruenbaum-Cohen Yael, Tucker Abigail S, Haze Amir, Shilo Dekel, Taylor Angela L, Shay Boaz, Sharpe Paul T, Mitsiadis Thimios A, Ornoy Asher, Blumenfeld Anat, Deutsch Dan
Journal of experimental zoology. Part B, Molecular and developmental evolution
The amelogenins comprise 90% of the developing extracellular enamel matrix proteins and play a major role in the biomineralization and structural organization of enamel. Amelogenins were also detected, in smaller amounts, in postnatal calcifying mesenchymal tissues, and in several nonmineralizing tissues including brain. Low molecular mass amelogenin isoforms were suggested to have signaling activity; to produce ectopically chondrogenic and osteogenic-like tissue and to affect mouse tooth germ differentiation in vitro. Recently, some amelogenin isoforms were found to bind to the cell surface receptors; LAMP-1, LAMP-2 and CD63, and subsequently localize to the perinuclear region of the cell. The recombinant amelogenin protein (rHAM(+)) alone brought about regeneration of the tooth supporting tissues: cementum, periodontal ligament and alveolar bone, in the dog model, through recruitment of progenitor cells and mesenchymal stem cells. We show that amelogenin is expressed in various tissues of the developing mouse embryonic cranio-facial complex such as brain, eye, ganglia, peripheral nerve trunks, cartilage and bone, and is already expressed at E10.5 in the brain and eye, long before the initiation of tooth formation. Amelogenin protein expression was detected in the tooth germ (dental lamina) already at E13.5, much earlier than previously reported (E19). Application of amelogenin (rHAM(+)) beads together with DiI, on E13.5 and E14.5 embryonic mandibular mesenchyme and on embryonic tooth germ, revealed recruitment of mesenchymal cells. The present results indicate that amelogenin has an important role in many tissues of the cranio-facial complex during mouse embryonic development and differentiation, and might be a multifunctional protein.
(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.19094429
Detecting anti-FcepsilonRI autoantibodies in patients with asthma by flow cytometry.
Sun R S, Chen X H, Sui J F, Liu R Q, Cheng T M, Ran X Z, Yang T
The Journal of international medical research
Autoimmune diseases have been implicated in the development of intrinsic asthma, however little data are available on the role of autoimmunity in the pathogenesis of asthma. The purpose of this study was to investigate circulating autoantibodies against the high-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E, FcepsilonRI, in patients with asthma. Seventy-eight patients with asthma and 32 healthy control subjects were included. All individuals were tested using a triple-staining flow cytometry-based basophil activation test (BAT) for the potential presence of autoantibodies against FcepsilonRI. Of the 78 asthma patients, 29 (37.2%) had a positive BAT result, indicating that their serum was able to activate basophils, compared with only four (12.5%) of the control group, a statistically significant between-group difference. These data suggest that some asthma patients have aberrant anti-FcepsilonRI autoantibodies, which implies that autoimmunity may be one factor involved in the pathogenesis of intrinsic asthma.19092285
Differential involvement of Ca2+ and actin filament in leukocyte shape change.
Schratl Petra, Heinemann Akos
Pharmacology
At the sites of inflammation, leukocytes are confronted with mediators which induce different cellular responses like chemotaxis, degranulation and respiratory burst. Morphologically, these responses are accompanied by changes in the cells' shape. In this study, we investigated the involvement of the actin cytoskeleton and Ca2+ in the shape change responses of human eosinophils and neutrophils to chemoattractants and correlated the obtained findings to degranulation and respiratory burst using flow cytometry. Shape change was recorded as an increase in forward scatter. Degranulation was measured as the cell surface upregulation of the granule-associated marker CD63. Respiratory burst was determined fluorimetrically as the oxidation of dihydrorhodamine 123. The involvement of actin filaments and phospholipase C (PLC) was investigated with the actin inhibitor cytochalasin B and the selective PLC inhibitor U-73122, respectively. The data that we obtained demonstrated that granulocytes exhibit 2 distinct types of shape change responses when stimulated with chemoattractants: (i) one type is induced by chemokines like eotaxin and interleukin 8, which are poor degranulators, and also by classical chemoattractants, C5a and formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine; this shape change depends on the activation of PLC and functional actin filaments, but does not require Ca2+ influx from outside; (ii) the second type of shape change is not stimulated by chemokines, but can be seen with classical chemoattractants which are also potent inducers of degranulation and respiratory burst. This type of shape change does not require any functional actin filaments, but appears to be a consequence of degranulation and depends essentially on the activation of PLC and Ca2+ influx from the extracellular space.
2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.19079288
Distinct requirements for activation-induced cell surface expression of preformed Fas/CD95 ligand and cytolytic granule markers in T cells.
Kassahn D, Nachbur U, Conus S, Micheau O, Schneider P, Simon H-U, Brunner T
Cell death and differentiation
Fas (CD95/Apo-1) ligand is a potent inducer of apoptosis and one of the major killing effector mechanisms of cytotoxic T cells. Thus, Fas ligand activity has to be tightly regulated, involving various transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes. For example, preformed Fas ligand is stored in secretory lysosomes of activated T cells, and rapidly released by degranulation upon reactivation. In this study, we analyzed the minimal requirements for activation-induced degranulation of Fas ligand. T cell receptor activation can be mimicked by calcium ionophore and phorbol ester. Unexpectedly, we found that stimulation with phorbol ester alone is sufficient to trigger Fas ligand release, whereas calcium ionophore is neither sufficient nor necessary. The relevance of this process was confirmed in primary CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and NK cells. Although the activation of protein kinase(s) was absolutely required for Fas ligand degranulation, protein kinase C or A were not involved. Previous reports have shown that preformed Fas ligand co-localizes with other markers of cytolytic granules. We found, however, that the activation-induced degranulation of Fas ligand has distinct requirements and involves different mechanisms than those of the granule markers CD63 and CD107a/Lamp-1. We conclude that activation-induced degranulation of Fas ligand in cytotoxic lymphocytes is differently regulated than other classical cytotoxic granule proteins.19077207
Interdependency of CEACAM-1, -3, -6, and -8 induced human neutrophil adhesion to endothelial cells.
Skubitz Keith M, Skubitz Amy P N
Journal of translational medicine
Members of the carcinoembryonic antigen family (CEACAMs) are widely expressed, and, depending on the tissue, capable of regulating diverse functions including tumor promotion, tumor suppression, angiogenesis, and neutrophil activation. Four members of this family, CEACAM1, CEACAM8, CEACAM6, and CEACAM3 (recognized by CD66a, CD66b, CD66c, and CD66d mAbs, respectively), are expressed on human neutrophils. CD66a, CD66b, CD66c, and CD66d antibodies each increase neutrophil adhesion to human umbilical vein endothelial cell monolayers. This increase in neutrophil adhesion caused by CD66 antibodies is blocked by CD18 mAbs and is associated with upregulation of CD11/CD18 on the neutrophil surface. To examine potential interactions of CEACAMs in neutrophil signaling, the effects on neutrophil adhesion to human umbilical vein endothelial cells of a set of CD66 mAbs was tested following desensitization to stimulation by various combinations of these mAbs. Addition of a CD66 mAb in the absence of calcium results in desensitization of neutrophils to stimulation by that CD66 mAb. The current data show that desensitization of neutrophils to any two CEACAMs results in selective desensitization to those two CEACAMs, while the cells remain responsive to the other two neutrophil CEACAMs. In addition, cells desensitized to CEACAM-3, -6, and -8 were still responsive to stimulation of CEACAM1 by CD66a mAbs. In contrast, desensitization of cells to CEACAM1 and any two of the other CEACAMs left the cells unresponsive to all CD66 mAbs. Cells desensitized to any combination of CEACAMs remained responsive to the unrelated control protein CD63. Thus, while there is significant independence of the four neutrophil CEACAMs in signaling, CEACAM1 appears to play a unique role among the neutrophil CEACAMs. A model in which CEACAMs dimerize to form signaling complexes could accommodate the observations. Similar interactions may occur in other cells expressing CEACAMs.19075008
Deficiency of the tetraspanin CD63 associated with kidney pathology but normal lysosomal function.
Schröder Jenny, Lüllmann-Rauch Renate, Himmerkus Nina, Pleines Irina, Nieswandt Bernhard, Orinska Zane, Koch-Nolte Friedrich, Schröder Bernd, Bleich Markus, Saftig Paul
Molecular and cellular biology
CD63 is a member of the tetraspanin superfamily that constitutes a main component of the lysosomal membrane. In mice, two CD63 gene loci are present, with only one of these two being functional. We generated and analyzed mice deficient for active CD63. Disruption of CD63 results in a complete loss of CD63 protein expression. Despite its abundance in late endosomes/lysosomes, the lack of CD63 does not cause obvious endosomal/lysosomal abnormalities. CD63 knockout mice are viable and fertile without gross morphological abnormalities in the majority of tissues. No alterations in the populations of immune cells and only minor differences in platelet function were observed. This suggests that the lack of CD63 could be successfully compensated for, most likely by other tetraspanins. However, CD63 deficiency leads to an altered water balance. CD63 knockout mice show an increased urinary flow, water intake, reduced urine osmolality, and a higher fecal water content. In principle cells of the collecting duct of CD63-deficient mice, abnormal intracellular lamellar inclusions were observed. This indicates that the sorting of apical transport proteins might be impaired in these cells. CD63 knockout mice provide an important tool for analyzing the various postulated functions of CD63 in vivo.19033387
The adaptor complex AP-2 regulates post-endocytic trafficking through the non-clathrin Arf6-dependent endocytic pathway.
Lau Alan W, Chou Margaret M
Journal of cell science
The ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6) GTPase functions as a key regulator of endocytic trafficking, participating in clathrin-independent endocytosis in most cell types. Unexpectedly, we found that siRNA-mediated depletion of clathrin or of adaptor protein 2 (AP-2)-complex subunits alters trafficking of Arf6 pathway cargo proteins, such as major histocompatibility complex class I (MHCI) and beta1 integrin. Internalization of these cargoes from the plasma membrane was not affected in cells depleted of clathrin, but was modestly delayed in cells lacking AP-2. Furthermore, depletion of clathrin or AP-2 altered the intracellular distribution of MHCI and beta1 integrin, inducing clustering in a perinuclear region. Despite this altered localization in both depleted populations, enhanced lysosomal targeting of MHCI was observed uniquely in cells that lack AP-2. Total levels of MHCI were modestly but consistently reduced in AP-2-depleted cells, and restored by the lysosomal inhibitor bafilomycin A. Furthermore, the half-life of surface-derived MHCI was reduced in AP-2-depleted cells. Consistent with enhanced degradative sorting, colocalization of Arf6 cargo with the late endosome and lysosome markers CD63 and Lamp1 was increased in cells depleted of AP-2 but not clathrin. These studies indicate a role for AP-2 in maintaining normal post-endocytic trafficking through the Arf6-regulated, non-clathrin pathway, and reveal pervasive effects of clathrin and AP-2 depletion on the endosomal and lysosomal system.19026096
Comparison of the in vivo autologous skin test with in vitro diagnostic tests for diagnosis of chronic autoimmune urticaria.
Altrich Michelle L, Halsey John F, Altman Leonard C
Allergy and asthma proceedings : the official journal of regional and state allergy societies
Previous studies indicate that 30-50% of chronic urticaria patients have an autoimmune etiology. Clinical diagnosis of autoimmune urticaria is supported with the autologous serum skin test. The purpose of this study was to compare two laboratory tests for measurement of IgG autoantibodies to IgE or IgE receptors and compare the results with the autologous serum and plasma skin tests. We performed skin tests and two functional in vitro tests, basophil histamine release, and CD63 up-regulation to detect autoantibodies relevant to autoimmune urticaria. Both sera and citrated plasma were evaluated in the autologous skin test and histamine release assay. Thyroid autoantibodies were also measured. Basophils were incubated with patient plasma, sera, buffer, or anti-IgE. The cells were analyzed for CD63 expression and the supernatants were recovered for histamine analysis. There was high correlation between CD63 up-regulation and histamine release assays, but histamine release was more sensitive. There was a high concordance between sera and citrated plasma for the skin test. Sera from chronic urticaria patients produced higher mean histamine release (23%) compared with citrated plasma (12%). Thirty-one percent of patients positive in the histamine release assay were also positive for thyroid autoantibodies. This compares with 12% who were negative in the histamine release assay. These data show that in vitro basophil histamine release can be used to measure antibodies to FceRI, FceRII/CD23, or IgE and identify patients with autoimmune urticaria.19017998
Infiltrated neutrophils acquire novel chemokine receptor expression and chemokine responsiveness in chronic inflammatory lung diseases.
Hartl Dominik, Krauss-Etschmann Susanne, Koller Barbara, Hordijk Peter L, Kuijpers Taco W, Hoffmann Florian, Hector Andreas, Eber Ernst, Marcos Veronica, Bittmann Iris, Eickelberg Oliver, Griese Matthias, Roos Dirk
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Various inflammatory diseases are characterized by tissue infiltration of neutrophils. Chemokines recruit and activate leukocytes, but neutrophils are traditionally known to be restricted in their chemokine receptor (CR) expression repertoire. Neutrophils undergo phenotypic and functional changes under inflammatory conditions, but the mechanisms regulating CR expression of infiltrated neutrophils at sites of chronic inflammation are poorly defined. Here we show that infiltrated neutrophils from patients with chronic inflammatory lung diseases and rheumatoid arthritis highly express CR on their surface that are absent or only marginally expressed on circulating neutrophils, i.e., CCR1, CCR2, CCR3, CCR5, CXCR3, and CXCR4, as measured by flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, and confocal microscopy. The induction of CR surface expression on infiltrated neutrophils was functionally relevant, because receptor activation by chemokine ligands ex vivo modulated neutrophil effector functions such as respiratory burst activity and bacterial killing. In vitro studies with isolated neutrophils demonstrated that the surface expression of CR was differentially induced in a cytokine-mediated, protein synthesis-dependent manner (CCR1, CCR3), through Toll-like (CXCR3) or NOD2 (CCR5) receptor engagement, through neutrophil apoptosis (CCR5, CXCR4), and/or via mobilization of intracellular CD63(+) granules (CXCR3). CR activation on infiltrated neutrophils may represent a key mechanism by which the local inflammatory microenvironment fine-tunes neutrophil effector functions in situ. Since the up-regulation of CR was exclusively found on infiltrated neutrophils at inflammatory sites in situ, the targeting of these G protein-coupled receptors may have the potential to site-specifically target neutrophilic inflammation.19015254
Human decay-accelerating factor and CEACAM receptor-mediated internalization and intracellular lifestyle of Afa/Dr diffusely adhering Escherichia coli in epithelial cells.
Guignot Julie, Hudault Sylvie, Kansau Imad, Chau Ingrid, Servin Alain L
Infection and immunity
We used transfected epithelial CHO-B2 cells as a model to identify the mechanism mediating internalization of Afa/Dr diffusely adhering Escherichia coli. We provide evidence that neither the alpha5 or beta1 integrin subunits nor alpha5beta1 integrin functioned as a receptor mediating the adhesion and/or internalization of Dr or Afa-III fimbria-positive bacteria. We also demonstrated that (i) whether or not the AfaD or DraD invasin subunits were present, there was no difference in the cell association and entry of bacteria and that (ii) DraE or AfaE-III adhesin subunits are necessary and sufficient to promote the receptor-mediated bacterial internalization into epithelial cells expressing human decay-accelerating factor (DAF), CEACAM1, CEA, or CEACAM6. Internalization of Dr fimbria-positive E. coli within CHO-DAF, CHO-CEACAM1, CHO-CEA, or CHO-CEACAM6 cells occurs through a microfilament-independent, microtubule-dependent, and lipid raft-dependent mechanism. Wild-type Dr fimbria-positive bacteria survived better within cells expressing DAF than bacteria internalized within CHO-CEACAM1, CHO-CEA, or CHO-CEACAM6 cells. In DAF-positive cells, internalized Dr fimbria-positive bacteria were located in vacuoles that contained more than one bacterium, displaying some of the features of late endosomes, including the presence of Lamp-1 and Lamp-2, and some of the features of CD63 proteins, but not of cathepsin D, and were acidic. No interaction between Dr fimbria-positive-bacterium-containing vacuoles and the autophagic pathway was observed.19013002
Prolonged continuous in vitro human platelet production using three-dimensional scaffolds.
Sullenbarger Brent, Bahng Joong Hwan, Gruner Ryan, Kotov Nicholas, Lasky Larry C
Experimental hematology
Methods producing human platelets using growth on plastic, on feeder layers, or in suspension have been described. We hypothesized that growth of hematopoietic progenitors in a three-dimensional (3D) scaffold would enhance platelet production sans feeder layer.
We grew CD34 positively selected human cord blood cells in surgical-grade woven polyester fabric or purpose-built hydrogel scaffolds using a cocktail of cytokines.
We found production of functional platelets over 10 days with two-dimensional (2D), 24 days with 3D scaffolds in wells, and more than 32 days in a single-pass 3D perfusion bioreactor system. Platelet numbers produced daily were higher in 3D than 2D, and much higher in the 3D perfusion bioreactor system. Platelet output increased in hydrogel scaffolds coated with thrombopoietin and/or fibronectin, although this effect was largely obviated with markedly increased production caused by changes in added cytokines. In response to thrombin, the platelets produced aggregated and displayed increased surface CD62 and CD63.
Use of 3D scaffolds, especially in a bioreactor-maintained milieu, may allow construction of devices for clinical platelet production without cellular feeder layers.18983491
Elevated platelet and leukocyte response to oral bacteria in periodontitis.
Nicu E A, Van der Velden U, Nieuwland R, Everts V, Loos B G
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
Periodontitis is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular diseases (CVD), but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Recently, we showed that platelets from periodontitis patients are more activated than those from controls.
Given the regularly occurring bacteremic episodes in periodontitis patients, we hypothesized that platelets and/or leukocytes from periodontitis patients are more sensitive to stimulation by oral bacteria, in particular the known periodontal pathogens, than platelets from control subjects.
Three-color flow cytometry analysis was performed to quantify activation of platelets (P-selectin, PAC-1, CD63) and leukocytes (CD11b) in whole blood from patients with periodontitis (n = 19) and controls (n = 18), with and without stimulation by oral bacteria. Phagocytosis was assessed by using green-fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa).
Neutrophils and monocytes were activated by all species of oral bacteria tested, but no differences were observed between patients and controls. In response to several species of oral bacteria, platelets from periodontitis patients showed, compared with controls, increased exposure of P-selectin (P = 0.027) and increased formation of platelet-monocyte complexes (P = 0.040). Platelet-leukocyte complexes bound and/or phagocytosed more GFP-Aa than platelet-free leukocytes (for neutrophils and monocytes, in both patients and controls, P < 0.001).
In periodontitis, increased platelet response to oral bacteria is paralleled by increased formation of platelet-leukocyte complexes with elevated capacity for bacterial clearance. We speculate that activated platelets and leukocytes might contribute to increased atherothrombotic activity.18946087
Human Discs Large is a new negative regulator of human immunodeficiency virus-1 infectivity.
Perugi Fabien, Muriaux Delphine, Ramirez Bertha Cecilia, Chabani Sabah, Decroly Etienne, Darlix Jean-Luc, Blot Vincent, Pique Claudine
Molecular biology of the cell
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 replication is positively or negatively regulated through multiple interactions with host cell proteins. We report here that human Discs Large (Dlg1), a scaffold protein recruited beneath the plasma membrane and involved in the assembly of multiprotein complexes, restricts HIV-1 infectivity. The endogenous Dlg1 and HIV-1 Gag polyprotein spontaneously interact in HIV-1-chronically infected T cells. Depleting endogenous Dlg1 in either adherent cells or T cells does not affect Gag maturation, production, or release, but it enhances the infectivity of progeny viruses five- to sixfold. Conversely, overexpression of Dlg1 reduces virus infectivity by approximately 80%. Higher virus infectivity upon Dlg1 depletion correlates with increased Env content in cells and virions, whereas the amount of virus-associated Gag or genomic RNA remains identical. Dlg1 knockdown is also associated with the redistribution and colocalization of Gag and Env toward CD63 and CD82 positive vesicle-like structures, including structures that seem to still be connected to the plasma membrane. This study identifies both a new negative regulator that targets the very late steps of the HIV-1 life cycle, and an assembly pathway that optimizes HIV-1 infectivity.18931982
[Basophil activation test as in vitro assay for cisplatin allergy].
Viardot-Helmer A, Ott H, Sauer I, Merk H F
Der Hautarzt; Zeitschrift für Dermatologie, Venerologie, und verwandte Gebiete
During chemoembolization with gemcitabine, mitomycin and cisplatin of a cholangiocellular carcinoma and after receiving iodide contrast media, a 49-year-old patient developed a grade III anaphylactic reaction. We were asked to verify an adverse reaction to contrast media. Using the basophil activation test, we demonstrated a hypersensitivity reaction to cisplatin with distinct induction of CD63-expression on basophilic granulocytes.18930046
Trafficking and function of the tetraspanin CD63.
Pols Maaike S, Klumperman Judith
Experimental cell research
Tetraspanins comprise a large superfamily of cell surface-associated membrane proteins characterized by four transmembrane domains. They participate in a variety of cellular processes, like cell activation, adhesion, differentiation and tumour invasion. At the cell surface, tetraspanins form networks with a wide diversity of proteins called tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs). CD63 was the first characterized tetraspanin. In addition to its presence in TEMs, CD63 is also abundantly present in late endosomes and lysosomes. CD63 at the cell surface is endocytosed via a clathrin-dependent pathway, although recent studies suggest the involvement of other pathways as well and we here present evidence for a role of caveolae in CD63 endocytosis. In late endosomes, CD63 is enriched on the intraluminal vesicles, which by specialized cells are secreted as exosomes through fusion of endosomes with the plasma membrane. The complex localization pattern of CD63 suggests that its intracellular trafficking and distribution must be tightly regulated. In this review we discuss the latest insights in CD63 trafficking and its emerging function as a transport regulator of its interaction partners. Finally, the involvement of CD63 in cancer will be discussed.18926050
The autoimmune nature of chronic urticaria.
Boguniewicz Mark
Allergy and asthma proceedings : the official journal of regional and state allergy societies
The association between chronic urticaria (CU) and autoimmune disease has been recognized for some time, especially with autoimmune thyroid disease. More recently, functional IgG autoantibodies against FcepsilonRIalpha and less commonly against IgE have been reported in a subset of patients with CU. These patients have been described as having more severe and difficult-to-control urticaria. The autologous serum skin test has been proposed as a surrogate test to define presence of these autoantibodies, although it identifies presence of histamine releasing factor, not necessarily antibody. Basophil histamine release and basophil activation assays using flow cytometry to measure CD63 and, more recently, CD203c expression have been used to identify patients with autoimmune urticaria. New research suggests that in some patients with CU, the activation of the extrinsic coagulation pathway with thrombin generation might play an important role in their CU.18925959
Differential response of human basophil activation markers: a multi-parameter flow cytometry approach.
Chirumbolo Salvatore, Vella Antonio, Ortolani Riccardo, De Gironcoli Marzia, Solero Pietro, Tridente Giuseppe, Bellavite Paolo
Clinical and molecular allergy : CMA
Basophils are circulating cells involved in hypersensitivity reactions and allergy but many aspects of their activation, including the sensitivity to external triggering factors and the molecular aspects of cell responses, are still to be focused. In this context, polychromatic flow cytometry (PFC) is a proper tool to investigate basophil function, as it allows to distinguish the expression of several membrane markers upon activation in multiple experimental conditions.
Cell suspensions were prepared from leukocyte buffy coat of K2-EDTA anticoagulated blood specimens; about 1500-2500 cellular events for each tested sample, gated in the lymphocyte CD45dim area and then electronically purified as HLADRnon expressing/CD123bright, were identified as basophilic cells. Basophil activation with fMLP, anti-IgE and calcium ionophore A23187 was evaluated by studying up-regulation of the indicated membrane markers with a two-laser six-color PFC protocol.
Following stimulation, CD63, CD13, CD45 and the ectoenzyme CD203c up-regulated their membrane expression, while CD69 did not; CD63 expression occurred immediately (within 60 sec) but only in a minority of basophils, even at optimal agonist doses (in 33% and 14% of basophils, following fMLP and anti-IgE stimulation respectively). CD203c up-regulation occurred in the whole basophil population, even in CD63non expressing cells. Dose-dependence curves revealed CD203c as a more sensitive marker than CD63, in response to fMLP but not in response to anti-IgE and to calcium ionophore.
Use of polychromatic flow cytometry allowed efficient basophil electronic purification and identification of different behaviors of the major activation markers. The simultaneous use of two markers of activation and careful choice of activator are essential steps for reliable assessment of human basophil functions.18852263
Tetraspanin CD151 regulates glycosylation of (alpha)3(beta)1 integrin.
Baldwin Gouri, Novitskaya Vera, Sadej Rafal, Pochec Ewa, Litynska Anna, Hartmann Christoph, Williams Janelle, Ashman Leonie, Eble Johannes A, Berditchevski Fedor
The Journal of biological chemistry
The tetraspanin CD151 forms a stoichiometric complex with integrin alpha3beta1 and regulates its endocytosis. We observed that down-regulation of CD151 in various epithelial cell lines changed glycosylation of alpha3beta1. In contrast, glycosylation of other transmembrane proteins, including those associated with CD151 (e.g. alpha6beta1, CD82, CD63, and emmprin/CD147) was not affected. The detailed analysis has shown that depletion of CD151 resulted in the reduction of Fucalpha1-2Gal and bisecting GlcNAc-beta(1-->4) linkage on N-glycans of the alpha3 integrin subunit. The modulatory activity of CD151 toward alpha3beta1 was specific, because stable knockdown of three other tetraspanins (i.e. CD9, CD63, and CD81) did not affect glycosylation of the integrin. Analysis of alpha3 glycosylation in CD151-depleted breast cancer cells with reconstituted expression of various CD151 mutants has shown that a direct contact with integrin is required but not sufficient for the modulatory activity of the tetraspanin toward alpha3beta1. We also found that glycosylation of CD151 is also critical; Asn(159) --> Gln mutation in the large extracellular loop did not affect interactions of CD151 with other tetraspanins or alpha3beta1 but negated its modulatory function. Changes in the glycosylation pattern of alpha3beta1 observed in CD151-depleted cells correlated with a dramatic decrease in cell migration toward laminin-332. Migration toward fibronectin or static adhesion of cells to extracellular matrix ligands was not affected. Importantly, reconstituted expression of the wild-type CD151 but not glycosylation-deficient mutant restored the migratory potential of the cells. These results demonstrate that CD151 plays an important role in post-translation modification of alpha3beta1 integrin and strongly suggest that changes in integrin glycosylation are critical for the promigratory activity of this tetraspanin.18849616
Safety and immunogenicity of a cluster specific immunotherapy in children with bronchial asthma and mite allergy.
Schubert R, Eickmeier O, Garn H, Baer P C, Mueller T, Schulze J, Rose M A, Rosewich M, Renz H, Zielen S
International archives of allergy and immunology
Cluster specific immunotherapy (SIT) is a modern form of allergen immunotherapy allowing safe administration of high allergen doses in a short time interval compared to classic SIT. In the current study, we investigated the safety profile and immunological effect of cluster SIT in children with allergic asthma due to house dust mite allergy.
A total of 34 children (6-18 years) with allergic asthma were assigned to cluster (n = 22) or classic SIT (n = 12). To achieve a maintenance dose of allergen extract, cluster patients received 14 injections of house dust mite allergen within 6 weeks, whereas the classic SIT group received 14 injections within 14 weeks. Safety was monitored by recording adverse events. Immunogenicity was measured by specific IgG(Mite) and IgG4(Mite), by antibody-blocking properties on basophil activation, and by the T cell subset transcription factors Foxp3, T-bet, and GATA-3.
There were no significant differences in local and systemic side effects between the two groups. In the cluster group, serum levels of specific IgG(Mite) (p < 0.001) and specific IgG4(Mite) (p < 0.001) significantly increased after 8 weeks, while it took 12 weeks in the classic SIT group. These data were confirmed by blocking CD63 expression as well as release of cysteinyl leukotrienes after in vitro basophil stimulation. No differences in transcription factor expression were found in the two groups.
Cluster SIT is safe in children. Additionally, our data demonstrated an even more rapid induction of specific immune tolerance. Cluster SIT is an attractive alternative to conventional up-dosing schedules with fewer consultations for the patients.
(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.18845681
Effect of host cell lipid metabolism on alphavirus replication, virion morphogenesis, and infectivity.
Ng Ching G, Coppens Isabelle, Govindarajan Dhanasekaran, Pisciotta John, Shulaev Vladimir, Griffin Diane E
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
The alphavirus Sindbis virus (SINV) causes encephalomyelitis in mice. Lipid-containing membranes, particularly cholesterol and sphingomyelin (SM), play important roles in virus entry, RNA replication, glycoprotein transport, and budding. Levels of SM are regulated by sphingomyelinases (SMases). Acid SMase (ASMase) deficiency results in the lipid storage disease type A Niemann-Pick disease (NPD-A), mimicked in mice by interruption of the ASMase gene. We previously demonstrated that ASMase-deficient mice are more susceptible to fatal SINV encephalomyelitis, with increased viral replication, spread, and neuronal death. To determine the mechanisms by which ASMase deficiency enhances SINV replication, we compared NPD-A fibroblasts (NPAF) to normal human fibroblasts (NHF). NPAF accumulated cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich late endosomes/lysosomes in the perinuclear region. SINV replication was faster and reached higher titer in NPAF than in NHF, and NPAF died more quickly. SINV RNA and protein synthesis was greater in NHF than in NPAF, but virions budding from NPAF were 26 times more infectious and were regular dense particles whereas virions from NHF were larger particles containing substantial amounts of CD63. Cellular regulation of alphavirus morphogenesis is a previously unrecognized mechanism for control of virus replication and spread.18841290
Platelet-derived microparticles and coagulation activation in breast cancer patients.
Toth Bettina, Liebhardt Susanne, Steinig Kerstin, Ditsch Nina, Rank Andreas, Bauerfeind Ingo, Spannagl Michael, Friese Klaus, Reininger Armin J
Thrombosis and haemostasis
In the mid 1800s Trousseau observed cancer-associated thrombosis, of which the underlying pathogenesis still remains unknown. We performed a prospective study on platelet-derived microparticles (PMP) and their procoagulant potential in breast cancer patients. Fifty-eight breast cancer patients and 13 women with benign breast tumors were included in the study. Microparticles (MP) were examined by electron microscopy and FACS analysis using labels for annexin V (total numbers), CD61 (PMP), CD62P and CD63 (activated platelets), CD62E (endothelial cells), CD45 (leukocytes) as well as CD142 (tissue factor). Prothrombin fragment 1+2 (F1+2) and thrombin generation were measured as blood coagulation markers. Numbers of annexin V+-MP were highest in breast cancer patients with larger tumor size (T2; median = 5,637 x 10(6)/l; range = 2,852-8,613) and patients with distant metastases (M1; median = 6,102 x 10(6)/l; range = 3,350-7,445), and differed significantly from patients with in-situ tumor (Tis; median = 3,220 x 10(6)/l; range = 2,277-4,124; p = 0.019), small tumor size (T1; median = 3,281 x 10(6)/l; range = 2,356-4,861; p = 0.043) and women with benign breast tumor (median = 4,108 x 10(6)/l; range = 2,530-4,874; p = 0.040). A total of 82.3% of MP were from platelets, 14.6 % from endothelial cells and 0.3% from leukocytes. Less than 10% of PMP showed degranulation markers. Larger tumor size (T2) and metastases correlated with high counts of PMP and with highest F1+2 levels. Since prothrombin levels and thrombin generation did not parallel MP levels, we speculate that MP act in the microenvironment of tumor tissue and may thus not be an exclusive parameter reflecting in-vivo procoagulant activity.18836553
Clathrin- and caveolin-independent entry of human papillomavirus type 16--involvement of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs).
Spoden Gilles, Freitag Kirsten, Husmann Matthias, Boller Klaus, Sapp Martin, Lambert Carsten, Florin Luise
PloS one
Infectious entry of human papillomaviruses into their host cells is an important step in the viral life cycle. For cell binding these viruses use proteoglycans as initial attachment sites. Subsequent transfer to a secondary receptor molecule seems to be involved in virus uptake. Depending on the papillomavirus subtype, it has been reported that entry occurs by clathrin- or caveolin-mediated mechanisms. Regarding human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16), the primary etiologic agent for development of cervical cancer, clathrin-mediated endocytosis was described as infectious entry pathway.
Using immunofluorescence and infection studies we show in contrast to published data that infectious entry of HPV16 occurs in a clathrin- and caveolin-independent manner. Inhibition of clathrin- and caveolin/raft-dependent endocytic pathways by dominant-negative mutants and siRNA-mediated knockdown, as well as inhibition of dynamin function, did not impair infection. Rather, we provide evidence for involvement of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs) in HPV16 endocytosis. Following cell attachment, HPV16 particles colocalized with the tetraspanins CD63 and CD151 on the cell surface. Notably, tetraspanin-specific antibodies and siRNA inhibited HPV16 cell entry and infection, confirming the importance of TEMs for infectious endocytosis of HPV16.
Tetraspanins fulfill various roles in the life cycle of a number of important viral pathogens, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV). However, their involvement in endocytosis of viral particles has not been proven. Our data indicate TEMs as a novel clathrin- and caveolin-independent invasion route for viral pathogens and especially HPV16.18826858
Mild-to-moderate renal impairment is associated with platelet activation: a cross-sectional study.
Thijs A, Nanayakkara P W B, Ter Wee P M, Huijgens P C, van Guldener C, Stehouwer C D A
Clinical nephrology
The high incidence of cardiovascular disease in patients with moderate renal impairment is not fully explained by traditional atherothrombotic risk factors. Independently from these factors, blood platelet activation may increase the cardiovascular disease risk of patients with mild-to-moderate renal impairment. Blood platelet activation has not been studied in nondiabetic patients with mild-to-moderate renal impairment. Therefore, we measured the extent of platelet activation by means of fluorescence cytometry in 93 nondiabetic patients with MDRD-estimated creatinine clearance ranging from 13 - 63 ml/min/1.73 m2. As platelet activation parameters we used the expression of CD62P (P-selectin), CD 63 (glycoprotein 53), PAC-1 (activated fibrinogen receptor), CD42b (von Willebrand factor receptor) and CD41 (fibrinogen receptor) on the platelet surface membrane. The expression of CD62p, CD63 and PAC-1 was statistically significantly inversely related to the estimated glomerular filtration rate in these patients (standardized b -0.28, -0.32 and -0.39, respectively). We conclude that nondiabetic mild-to-moderate renal impairment is associated with blood platelet activation. Whether this contributes to the increased cardiovascular risk in these patients needs further study.18817894
Effects of a new nutraceutical ingredient on allergen-induced sulphidoleukotrienes production and CD63 expression in allergic subjects.
Caruso M, Frasca G, Di Giuseppe P L, Pennisi A, Tringali G, Bonina F P
International immunopharmacology
Allergic diseases represent conditions affecting millions of individuals across the world. The objective of this study was to investigate the potential anti-allergic effects of a new nutraceutical ingredient, Pantescal (Bionap, Italy), contained in different food supplements. Pantescal is a mixture of plant extracts, such as Capparis spinosa, Olea europaea, Panax Ginseng and Ribes nigrum. The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled design. 60 patients allergic to common aeroallergens were chosen. Allergic patients were divided into two groups: one group was supplemented by Pantescal and the other, using a placebo formulation. Two in vitro tests were performed on blood samples taken from patients before and at 2 h, 2, 3 and 10 days after supplementation: cellular antigen stimulation test (CAST) was used to analyze the amount of sulphidoleukotrienes (SLT) production and flow-cytometric antigen stimulation test (FAST) to measure expression of basophil degranulation marker (CD63) was also performed. CAST showed that after 2 and 3 days, a slight decrease of SLT production was evident but only after 10 days did it become significant with a percentage of inhibition (P.I)=43.3%. FAST revealed that there were no statistical differences for the first 2 days after supplementation although there was an inhibitory trend in the supplemented patients. CD63 expression was significantly reduced after 10 days (P.I.=64.8%). This study suggests that Pantescal is effective in reducing allergic biomarkers such as CD63 protein and SLT in atopic subjects. The higher inhibitory effect on CD63 expression compared to SLT production allows us to hypothesize cell membrane stabilization as the main potential mechanism to explain the observed Pantescal protective effects.18795891
Identification of Tspan9 as a novel platelet tetraspanin and the collagen receptor GPVI as a component of tetraspanin microdomains.
Protty Majd B, Watkins Nicholas A, Colombo Dario, Thomas Steven G, Heath Victoria L, Herbert John M J, Bicknell Roy, Senis Yotis A, Ashman Leonie K, Berditchevski Fedor, Ouwehand Willem H, Watson Steve P, Tomlinson Michael G
The Biochemical journal
Platelets are essential for wound healing and inflammatory processes, but can also play a deleterious role by causing heart attack and stroke. Normal platelet activation is dependent on tetraspanins, a superfamily of glycoproteins that function as 'organisers' of cell membranes by recruiting other receptors and signalling proteins into tetraspanin-enriched microdomains. However, our understanding of how tetraspanin microdomains regulate platelets is hindered by the fact that only four of the 33 mammalian tetraspanins have been identified in platelets. This is because of a lack of antibodies to most tetraspanins and difficulties in measuring mRNA, due to low levels in this anucleate cell. To identify potentially platelet-expressed tetraspanins, mRNA was measured in their nucleated progenitor cell, the megakaryocyte, using serial analysis of gene expression and DNA microarrays. Amongst 19 tetraspanins identified in megakaryocytes, Tspan9, a previously uncharacterized tetraspanin, was relatively specific to these cells. Through generating the first Tspan9 antibodies, Tspan9 expression was found to be tightly regulated in platelets. The relative levels of CD9, CD151, Tspan9 and CD63 were 100, 14, 6 and 2 respectively. Since CD9 was expressed at 49000 cell surface copies per platelet, this suggested a copy number of 2800 Tspan9 molecules. Finally, Tspan9 was shown to be a component of tetraspanin microdomains that included the collagen receptor GPVI (glycoprotein VI) and integrin alpha6beta1, but not the von Willebrand receptor GPIbalpha or the integrins alphaIIbbeta3 or alpha2beta1. These findings suggest a role for Tspan9 in regulating platelet function in concert with other platelet tetraspanins and their associated proteins.18789818
The functional activity of basophil granulocytes is modulated by acute mental stress and sympathetic activation in vivo and in vitro.
Raap Ulrike, Schmid-Ott Gerhard, Bruder Manuela, Wichmann Katja, Kapp Alexander, Werfel Thomas
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
18787187
C-reactive protein isoforms differ in their effects on thrombus growth.
Molins Blanca, Peña Esther, Vilahur Gemma, Mendieta Carlos, Slevin Mark, Badimon Lina
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology
We studied the impact of native (natCRP) and modified CRP (mCRP) isoforms on platelet adhesion and thrombus growth under arterial flow.
Blood was perfused over type I collagen at a wall shear rate of 1500 s(-1), and platelet deposition and thrombus growth were evaluated by confocal microscopy. natCRP and mCRP were either incubated with blood before perfusion experiments or immobilized in the collagen surface and exposed to flowing blood. mCRP significantly increased platelet adhesion and thrombus growth when directly incubated with blood and when immobilized on a collagen surface (P<0.05). In contrast, natCRP did not exert any effect. Confocal immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of CRP on the surface of adhered platelets and within the thrombus and showed an upregulation of P-selectin and CD36 in effluent platelets preincubated with mCRP (P<0.05). Flow cytometry analysis of agonist-induced platelet activation demonstrated that mCRP, but not natCRP, significantly increased platelet surface P-selectin (P<0.05) without modifying CD63 and PAC-1.
Our data indicate that whereas serum natCRP may not affect thrombus growth, mCRP displays a prothrombotic phenotype enhancing not only platelet deposition, but also thrombus growth under arterial flow conditions.18776163
Histopathology of vascular injury in Sprague-Dawley rats treated with phosphodiesterase IV inhibitor SCH 351591 or SCH 534385.
Zhang Jun, Snyder Ronald D, Herman Eugene H, Knapton Alan, Honchel Ronald, Miller Terry, Espandiari Parvaneh, Goodsaid Federico M, Rosenblum Irwin Y, Hanig Joseph P, Sistare Frank D, Weaver James L
Toxicologic pathology
Histopathological and immunohistochemical studies were conducted to characterize vascular injuries in rats treated with phosphodiesterase (PDE) IV inhibitors SCH 351591 or SCH 534385. Sprague-Dawley rats were administered PDE IV inhibitors by gavage at a range of doses and times. The two PDE IV inhibitors induced comparable levels of vascular injury, primarily in the mesentery and to a lesser extent in the pancreas, kidney, liver, small intestine, and stomach. Mesenteric vascular changes occurred as early as one hour, progressively developed over twenty-four to forty-eight hours, peaked at seventy-two hours, and gradually subsided from seven to nine days. The typical morphology of the vascular toxicity consisted of hemorrhage and necrosis of arterioles and arteries, microvascular injury, fibrin deposition, and perivascular inflammation of a variety of blood vessels. The incidence and severity of mesenteric vascular injury increased in a time- and dose-dependent manner in SCH 351591- or SCH 534385-treated rats. Mesenteric vascular injury was frequently associated with activation of mast cells (MC), endothelial cells (EC), and macrophages (MØ). Immunohistochemical studies showed increases in CD63 immunoreactivity of mesenteric MC and in nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity of mesenteric EC and MØ. The present study also provides a morphological and cellular basis for evaluating candidate biomarkers of drug-induced vascular injury.18768832
Rab27a regulates exocytosis of tertiary and specific granules in human neutrophils.
Herrero-Turrión M Javier, Calafat Jero, Janssen Hans, Fukuda Mitsunori, Mollinedo Faustino
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
The correct mobilization of cytoplasmic granules is essential for the proper functioning of human neutrophils in host defense and inflammation. In this study, we have found that human peripheral blood neutrophils expressed high levels of Rab27a, whereas Rab27b expression was much lower. This indicates that Rab27a is the predominant Rab27 isoform present in human neutrophils. Rab27a was up-regulated during neutrophil differentiation of HL-60 cells. Subcellular fractionation and immunoelectron microscopy studies of resting human neutrophils showed that Rab27a was mainly located in the membranes of specific and gelatinase-enriched tertiary granules, with a minor localization in azurophil granules. Rab27a was largely absent from CD35-enriched secretory vesicles. Tertiary and specific granule-located Rab27a population was translocated to the cell surface upon neutrophil activation with PMA that induced exocytosis of both tertiary and specific granules. Specific Abs against Rab27a inhibited Ca(2+) and GTP-gamma-S activation and PMA-induced exocytosis of CD66b-enriched tertiary and specific granules in electropermeabilized neutrophils, whereas secretion of CD63-enriched azurophil granules was scarcely affected. Human neutrophils lacked or expressed low levels of most Slp/Slac2 proteins, putative Rab27 effectors, suggesting that additional proteins should act as Rab27a effectors in human neutrophils. Our data indicate that Rab27a is a major component of the exocytic machinery of human neutrophils, modulating the secretion of tertiary and specific granules that are readily mobilized upon neutrophil activation.18727065
Simultaneous flow cytometric detection of basophil activation marker CD63 and intracellular phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in birch pollen allergy.
Aerts Nicolaas E, Dombrecht Evelyne J, Bridts Chris H, Hagendorens Margo M, de Clerck Luc S, Stevens Wim J, Ebo Didier G
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Phosphorylation of p38 MAPK is a crucial step in IgE-receptor signaling in basophils. The relation of p38 MAPK to the well-validated diagnostic cell surface marker CD63 has not been evaluated in a clinical allergy model.
Expression of CD63 and phosphorylation of p38 MAPK were analyzed flow cytometrically in anti-IgE-gated basophils from 18 birch pollen allergic patients, five grass pollen allergic patients, and five healthy individuals, after 3 and 20 min of stimulation with recombinant major birch pollen allergen (rBet v 1). Additional time points and the influence of p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 were studied in birch pollen allergic patients.
Phospho-p38 MAPK and CD63 were expressed dose-dependently in birch pollen allergic patient basophils within 1 minute of rBet v 1 stimulation. P38 MAPK phosphorylation was fastest and subsided gradually while CD63 expression remained elevated for at least 20 min. Inhibition of p38 MAPK significantly inhibited CD63 upregulation. With optimal stimulation of the cells (1 μg/mL), sensitivity and specificity for the discrimination between patients and a group of control individuals (grass pollen allergic patients and healthy controls) were 94% and 100% for CD63 at 3 and 20 min and for phospho-p38 MAPK at 3 min.
Antigen-induced p38 MAPK phosphorylation in human basophils essentially contributes to CD63 upregulation. It is a sensitive and specific intracellular marker for allergy diagnosis and offers new insight into the mechanisms of basophil activation.
Copyright © 2008 Clinical Cytometry Society.18682304
A critical role for CD63 in HIV replication and infection of macrophages and cell lines.
Chen Hui, Dziuba Natallia, Friedrich Brian, von Lindern Jana, Murray James L, Rojo Daniel R, Hodge Thomas W, O'Brien William A, Ferguson Monique R
Virology
HIV infection typically involves interaction of Env with CD4 and a chemokine coreceptor, either CCR5 or CXCR4. Other cellular factors supporting HIV replication have also been characterized. We previously demonstrated a role for CD63 in early HIV infection events in macrophages via inhibition by anti-CD63 antibody pretreatment. To confirm the requirement for CD63 in HIV replication, we decreased CD63 expression using CD63-specific short interfering RNAs (siRNA), and showed inhibition of HIV replication in macrophages. Surprisingly, pretreatment with CD63 siRNA not only silenced CD63 expression by 90%, but also inhibited HIV-1 replication in a cultured cell line (U373-MAGI) which had been previously shown to be insensitive to CD63 monoclonal antibody inhibition. Although the anti-CD63 antibody was previously shown to inhibit early HIV infection events only in macrophages, we now show a potential role for CD63 in later HIV replication events in macrophages and cell lines. Further delineation of the role of CD63 in HIV replication may lead to development of novel therapeutic compounds.18676354
The effects of LAMP1 and LAMP3 on M180 amelogenin uptake, localization and amelogenin mRNA induction by amelogenin protein.
Xu Liming, Harada Hidemitsu, Taniguchi Akiyoshi
Journal of biochemistry
We previously demonstrated that the uptake of M180 amelogenin protein in dental epithelial cells (HAT-7) results in increased levels of amelogenin mRNA through enhanced mRNA stabilization. To determine the processes involved in the uptake of extracellular M180 amelogenin by cells and in amelogenin intracellular trafficking in the amelogenin protein-mediated amelogenin mRNA expression pathway, we investigated the effects of LAMP1 and LAMP3, which are candidate M180 amelogenin receptors, on M180 amelogenin uptake, localization and amelogenin mRNA induction by amelogenin protein, using anti-LAMP-1 and anti-LAMP-3 antibodies and siRNA analysis. The results indicate that LAMP3 blocking by anti-LAMP-3 decreases M180 amelogenin uptake, but does not affect amelogenin mRNA induction by amelogenin protein, suggesting that LAMP3 is related to amelogenin degradation. Down-regulation by siRNA of LAMP1, which is the receptor for small amelogenin protein (LRAP), does not affect M180 amelogenin uptake, localization or amelogenin mRNA induction by amelogenin protein. Thus, while LAMP1 is the specific receptor for LRAP, it is not a receptor for M180 amelogenin. These findings will aid further research into the understanding of M180 amelogenin function and expression.18669870
The tetraspanin CD63 is involved in granule targeting of neutrophil elastase.
Källquist Linda, Hansson Markus, Persson Ann-Maj, Janssen Hans, Calafat Jero, Tapper Hans, Olsson Inge
Blood
Targeting mechanisms of neutrophil elastase (NE) and other luminal proteins stored in myeloperoxidase (MPO)-positive secretory lysosomes/primary granules of neutrophils are unknown. These granules contain an integral membrane protein, CD63, with an adaptor protein-3-dependent granule delivery system. Therefore, we hypothesized that CD63 cooperates in granule delivery of the precursor of NE (proNE). Supporting this hypothesis, an association was demonstrated between CD63 and proNE upon coexpression in COS cells. This also involved augmented cellular retention of proNE requiring intact large extracellular loop of CD63. Furthermore, depletion of CD63 in promyelocytic HL-60 cells with RNA interference or a CD63 mutant caused reduction of cellular NE. However, the proNE steady-state level was similar to wild type in CD63-depleted clones, making it feasible to examine possible effects of CD63 on NE trafficking. Thus, depletion of CD63 led to reduced processing of proNE into mature NE and reduced constitutive secretion. Furthermore, CD63-depleted cells showed a lack of morphologically normal granules, but contained MPO-positive cytoplasmic vacuoles with a lack of proNE and NE. Collectively, our data suggest that granule proteins may cooperate in targeting; CD63 can be involved in ER or Golgi export, cellular retention, and granule targeting of proNE before storage as mature NE.18652234
[An immunocytochemical investigation of antigen expression by skin melanoma cells cultured for vaccine production].
Moiseenko V M, Danilova A B, Danilov A O, Turkevich E A, Baldueva I A, Matsko D E
Voprosy onkologii
There is a great variety of histological patterns of skin melanoma and, in particular, that of its metastatic patterns. Malignant melanocytes are capable of influencing tumor-associated antigen expression. As of now, several varieties of melanoma-associated antigens (MAA) have been identified: MART1/melan A, tyrosinase, MITF, gp100, members of MAGE family, S100, CD63 and CD146. Peptides isolated from such molecules can induce MHC-restricted response of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. It has been shown that level and nature of specific antigen expression caused by melanocytes correlate with tumor stage and a relationship between survival and MAA expression on tumor cells identified. Morphological features, growth pattern and proliferation rate varied in melanoma cell cultures used in our study. Our experiments involved evaluation of changes in the properties of antigens HLA (class 1 and 2), tumor tissue samples and cells isolated from them, which were capable of stable proliferative activity during passages 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 and 35, and assay for MAA content. Levels of the antigens were significantly lower following long-term culturing melanoma cell melanoma cells in vitro. At initial passages (1-5), antigen profile in most cultures was similar to that in tumor tissue samples. Later on each cell population showed greater antigen expression heterogeneity matched by increased number of cells going through mitotic cycle; their nuclei were stained with antibodies to Ki-67. No HLF A/B/C molecule expression took place during tumor cell culturing: stained cells--in 68.9% of cultures (passages 1-5) and 36.3% (passage 35). However, HLA DQ/DP/DR molecule identification showed an inverse relationship: 44.1% (passage 5) while virtually all the cell lines did synthesize those molecules after passage 35. Hence, MAA and MHC (class 1 and 2) antigens expression in tumor cell should be monitored when they are used for preparation of autologuos and allogenic vaccines. In case of allogenic vaccine production, cell lines capable of stable production of MAA should be selected.18650341
Lysosomes are the major vesicular compartment undergoing Ca2+-regulated exocytosis from cortical astrocytes.
Li Dongdong, Ropert Nicole, Koulakoff Annette, Giaume Christian, Oheim Martin
The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience
Although Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis is considered to be a pathway for gliotransmitter release from astrocytes, the structural and functional bases of this process remain controversial. We studied the relationship between near-membrane Ca(2+) elevations and the dynamics of single astroglial vesicles with styryl (FM) dyes. We show that cultured astrocytes, unlike neurons, spontaneously internalize FM dyes, resulting in the labeling of the entire acidic vesicle population within minutes. Interestingly, metabotropic glutamate receptor activation did not affect the FM labeling. Most FM-stained vesicles expressed sialin, CD63/LAMP3, and VAMP7, three markers for lysosomes and late endosomes. A subset of lysosomes underwent asynchronous exocytosis that required both Ca(2+) mobilization from intracellular stores and Ca(2+) influx across the plasma membrane. Lysosomal fusion occurred within seconds and was complete with no evidence for kiss and run. Our experiments suggest that astroglial Ca(2+)-regulated exocytosis is carried by lysosomes and operates on a timescale orders of magnitude slower than synaptic transmission.18637904
Human herpesvirus-6 induces MVB formation, and virus egress occurs by an exosomal release pathway.
Mori Yasuko, Koike Masato, Moriishi Eiko, Kawabata Akiko, Tang Huamin, Oyaizu Hiroko, Uchiyama Yasuo, Yamanishi Koichi
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
The final envelopment of most herpesviruses occurs at Golgi or post-Golgi compartments, such as the trans Golgi network (TGN); however, the final envelopment site of human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) is uncertain. In this study, we found novel pathways for HHV-6 assembly and release from T cells that differed, in part, from those of alphaherpesviruses. Electron microscopy showed that late in infection, HHV-6-infected cells were larger than uninfected cells and contained many newly formed multivesicular body (MVB)-like compartments that included small vesicles. These MVBs surrounded the Golgi apparatus. Mature virions were found in the MVBs and MVB fusion with plasma membrane, and the release of mature virions together with small vesicles was observed at the cell surface. Immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated that the MVBs contained CD63, an MVB/late endosome marker, and HHV-6 envelope glycoproteins. The viral glycoproteins also localized to internal vesicles in the MVBs and to secreted vesicles (exosomes). Furthermore, we found virus budding at TGN-associated membranes, which expressed CD63, adaptor protein (AP-1) and TGN46, and CD63 incorporation into virions. Our findings suggest that mature HHV-6 virions are released together with internal vesicles through MVBs by the cellular exosomal pathway. This scenario has significant implications for understanding HHV-6's maturation pathway.18618353
Soluble, platelet-bound, and total P-selectin as indices of platelet activation in congestive heart failure.
Chung Irene, Choudhury Anirban, Patel Jeetesh, Lip Gregory Y H
Annals of medicine
Many complications associated with congestive heart failure (CHF) have a thrombosis-related aetiology. Platelets play an important role in thrombogenesis, but it is not clear whether circulating platelets actively participate in thrombosis-related complications associated with CHF.
To determine whether soluble P-selectin, platelet surface P-selectin, and total platelet P-selectin as indices of platelet activation in CHF patients-compared to 'disease controls' and 'healthy controls'-and to assess their prognostic value in CHF.
We measured soluble P-selectin (sP-sel, by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, ELISA), total platelet P-selectin (pP-sel, by a novel 'platelet lysate' assay), platelet surface P-selectin (CD62P%G) and platelet surface CD63 (CD63%G) expression by flow cytometry-in 108 patients with stable congestive heart failure (all with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <50%). Levels were compared with 50 healthy controls and 70 'disease controls' (patients with coronary artery disease with normal left ventricular systolic function).
CHF patients and disease controls had higher sP-sel, CD62P%G and CD63%G than healthy controls. There were no significant correlations between sP-sel, pP-sel, CD62P%G and CD63%G with ejection fraction (all P>0.05). There were no differences in these markers when ischaemic and non-ischaemic aetiologies of CHF were compared. After a median follow-up of 490 days (range 340-535), there were 7 deaths, 15 hospitalizations for worsening heart failure, 1 for cardiac resynchronization therapy, 4 for revascularizations, 4 for myocardial infarctions, and 1 stroke. None of the platelet markers were predictive of the composite end-point at follow-up.
Patients with stable CHF exhibit evidence of abnormal platelet activation, despite usage of antiplatelet agents. These abnormalities did not determine prognosis and were broadly similar to those seen in 'disease controls' indicating that platelet abnormalities in CHF may simply be related to associated comorbidities.18615566
Confocal imaging and tracking of the exocytotic routes for D-serine-mediated gliotransmission.
Martineau Magalie, Galli Thierry, Baux Gérard, Mothet Jean-Pierre
Glia
D-Serine is an astrocyte-derived regulator for N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, but the intracellular routes of its trafficking are still largely unknown. Here, we combined confocal microscopy with colocalization quantification to track the astrocytic organelles that store D-serine. We report that D-serine colocalizes with the transfected eGFP-synaptobrevin/VAMP2 and eGFP-cellubrevin/VAMP3, two v-SNAREs of the regulated secretory pathway. No significant colocalization was found with markers of the endosomal sorting and recycling system: EEA1, eGFP-endobrevin/VAMP8, eGFP-TI-VAMP/VAMP7, LAMP1, and CD63. Blockade of vesicular budding with colchicine shows that secretory vesicles import D-serine downstream to the Golgi apparatus. Finally, treatment of astrocytes with the Ca2+-ionophore A23187, glutamate agonists, or bradykinin trigger translocation of synaptobrevin/VAMP2 to the plasma membrane with a concomitant disappearance of D-serine from the regulated secretory pathway. Our results provide morphological evidence for a vesicular storage of D-serine in the regulated secretory pathway and the possible recruitment of these stores by Ca2+ mobilization to release D-serine.
(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.18612141
Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in cell signaling: metalloproteinase-independent biological activities.
Stetler-Stevenson William G
Science signaling
Over the past 20 years, the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) have been implicated in direct regulation of cell growth and apoptosis. However, the mechanisms of these effects have been controversial. Recent work by several laboratories has identified specific signaling pathways and cell surface binding partners for members of the TIMP family. TIMP-2 binding to the integrin alpha(3)beta(1) is the first description of a cell surface receptor for a TIMP family member. TIMP-2 has been shown to induce gene expression, to promote G(1) cell cycle arrest, and to inhibit cell migration. TIMP-1 binding to CD63 inhibits cell growth and apoptosis. These new findings suggest that TIMPs are multifunctional and can act either directly through cell surface receptors or indirectly through modulation of protease activity to direct cell fate. The emerging concept is that TIMPs function in a contextual fashion so that the mechanism of action depends on the tissue microenvironment.18600034
How depression may increase cardiac risk: effect of hypercortisolism on platelet activation markers: preliminary data.
Baranyai Réka, Nonell Annemarie, Deuschle Michael, Lederbogen Florian
Neuropsychobiology
Hypercortisolism, as seen in the majority of patients with major depression, may be associated with the generation of platelets that show signs of increased activation.
Within a study using a placebo-controlled double-blind cross-over design, 9 healthy subjects ingested hydrocortisone (daily dose = 40 mg) or placebo on 7 consecutive days. At the end of each study segment, we analyzed platelets for the surface activation markers P-selectin, glycoprotein 53, and PAC-1 and measured platelet-leucocyte aggregates in serum.
Hydrocortisone ingestion was not associated with changes in the platelet activation markers P-selectin and PAC-1 or the number of circulating platelet-leucocyte aggregates but with a trend (p = 0.056) toward higher expression of glycoprotein 53 on the platelet surface.
Induction of hypercortisolism in healthy volunteers was not associated with a major increase in platelet activation markers.
Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.18564641
Scampi allergy: from fancy name-giving to correct diagnosis.
Ebo D G, Bridts C H, Hagendorens M M, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
18564624
Diagnostic tests based on human basophils: more potentials and perspectives than pitfalls. II. Technical issues.
De Week A L, Sanz M L, Gamboa P M, Aberer W, Bienvenu J, Blanca M, Demoly P, Ebo D G, Mayorga L, Monneret G, Sainte Laudy J
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
Cellular basophil activation tests (BAT) such as histamine or sulfidoleukotriene-release tests for allergy diagnosis have been available for some time, but expression of basophil-activation markers such as CD63 and CD203c detected by flow cytometry has attracted particular attention in recent years. Not only the potential but also the possible pitfalls of flow-cytometric BAT have been stressed recently. Some authors have suggested that the technical problems are still such that BAT should only be performed in specialist laboratories. In an earlier review based on our clinical experience obtained over several years, we showed that, even using different protocols, reproducible and meaningful clinical results can be obtained. In this paper, we review the current knowledge in relation to several technical issues and show that flow-cytometric BAT already represents a major advance in the field of in vitro allergy diagnosis. We conclude that there are no serious technical justifications for depriving allergic patients of clinically indicated BAT tests, which can be performed reliably by any laboratory with the appropriate experience in allergy diagnosis and flow cytometry.18555885
Tsg101 can replace Nedd4 function in ASV Gag release but not membrane targeting.
Medina Gisselle, Pincetic Andrew, Ehrlich Lorna S, Zhang Yongjun, Tang Yi, Leis Jonathan, Carter Carol A
Virology
The Late (L) domain of the avian sarcoma virus (ASV) Gag protein binds Nedd4 ubiquitin ligase E3 family members and is the determinant of efficient virus release in avian and mammalian cells. We previously demonstrated that Nedd4 and Tsg101 constitutively interact raising the possibility that Nedd4 links ASV Gag to the ESCRT machinery. We now demonstrate that covalently linking Tsg101 to ASV Gag lacking the Nedd4 binding site (Deltap2b-Tsg101) ablates the requirement for Nedd4, but the rescue of budding occurs by use of a different budding mechanism than that used by wild type ASV Gag. The evidence that Tsg101 and Nedd4 direct release by different pathways is: (i) Release of the virus-like particles (VLPs) assembled from Gag in DF-1, an avian cell line, was resistant to dominant-negative interference by a Tsg101 mutant previously shown to inhibit release of both HIV and Mo-MLV. (ii) Release of VLPs from DF-1 cells was resistant to siRNA-mediated depletion of the endogenous pool of Tsg101 in these cells. (iii) VLPs assembled from wild-type ASV Gag exhibited highly efficient release from endosome-like membrane domains enriched in the tetraspanin protein CD63 or a fluorescent analogue of the phospholipid phosphatidylethanolamine. However, the VLPs assembled from the L domain mutant Deltap2b or a chimeric Deltap2b-Tsg101 Gag lacked these domain markers even though the chimeric Gag was released efficiently compared to the Deltap2b mutant. These results suggest that Tsg101 and Nedd4 facilitate Gag release through functionally exchangeable but independent routes and that Tsg101 can replace Nedd4 function in facilitating budding but not directing through the same membranes.18542926
The dopamine agonism on ADP-stimulated platelets is mediated through D2-like but not D1-like dopamine receptors.
Schedel Angelika, Schloss Patrick, Klüter Harald, Bugert Peter
Naunyn-Schmiedeberg's archives of pharmacology
Monoamines such as serotonin and epinephrine are known to be involved in platelet activation and aggregation. Dopamine is another monoamine identified in platelets, but published data about its effect on platelets and the receptors involved are controversial. In the present study, we investigated the dopamine agonism in platelets and the receptors involved in these pathways. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) of healthy individuals was treated with agonists (ADP, epinephrine, dopamine) and various dopamine receptor and transporter antagonists such as SCH-23390, raclopride, clozapine, methylphenidate, and cocaine. Platelet activation was investigated by flow cytometry (CD62P and CD63 surface expression), optical aggregometry, and microaggregate adhesion to collagen IV in a flow chamber system. In our study, dopamine on its own had no effect on platelet activation in the different assays. However, when used in combination with ADP (10 muM), dopamine in a range of 1 to 100 muM significantly potentiated platelet microaggregate formation and adhesion to collagen under low shear flow conditions. Specific antagonists for D2-like receptors (L-741,626, raclopride, and clozapine) completely diminished the dopamine effect at selective concentrations, but not the effect of epinephrine. Neither the D1-like receptor antagonist SCH-23390 nor dopamine transporter antagonists (methylphenidate, cocaine) showed inhibitory effects on the dopamine agonism. Thus, dopamine is an ADP-dependent platelet agonist which acts via D2-like but not D1-like receptors or adrenergic receptors. Because many psychopharmacological drugs are directed to D2-like receptors, platelet dysfunction in patients being treated with such drugs may be linked to these mechanisms.18534081
Basophil activation test for the in vitro diagnosis of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug hypersensitivity.
Rodríguez-Trabado Ana, Cámara-Hijón Carmen, Ramos-Cantariño Alfonso, Porcel-Carreño Sergio Luis, Jiménez-Timón Soledad, Pereira-Navarro Gema, Hernández-Arbeiza Francisco Javier, Fernández-Pereira Luis
Allergy and asthma proceedings : the official journal of regional and state allergy societies
There is need for an in vitro diagnostic test for hypersensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The purpose of this study was to assess the reliability of one such diagnostic, the basophil activation test. Forty-three drug hypersensitive patients referring several immediate reactions (anaphylaxis, urticaria, angioedema, asthma, and rhinoconjunctivitis) to one or more NSAIDs and 29 controls participated. Using the Basotest commercial kit, 63 determinations were performed with the drugs implicated in the adverse reactions (ASA, ibuprofen, metamizol, diclofenac, paracetamol, and ketorolac). In 16 patients additional determinations were made with other chemically unrelated NSAIDs. Forty-two determinations were made for controls. The analysis was performed by flow colorimetric cytometry and double staining with the monoclonal antibodies anti-IgE and anti-CD63. A Basophil Activation Index (percentage of activated basophils after allergen stimulation/percentage of basally activated basophils) of two or more was considered a positive result. Specificity of 100% and sensitivity of 42.85% were achieved. The positive predictive value was 100%, and the negative predictive value was 53.84%. In 35.29% of intolerant patients there was a positive reaction to at least two drugs implicated in adverse reactions, and in 27.27% of these patients there was a positive reaction to other chemically unrelated NSAIDs. The basophil activation test is useful for the in vitro diagnosis of NSAID hypersensitivity, providing good specificity and positive predictive value and diagnostic reliability in the assessment of NSAID intolerance.18521510
Role of membrane cholesterol in platelet calcium signalling in response to VWF and collagen under stasis and flow.
van Lier Marjolijn, Verhoef Sandra, Cauwenberghs Sandra, Heemskerk Johan W M, Akkerman Jan-Willem N, Heijnen Harry F G
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Several studies have highlighted a specific role for membrane cholesterol domains in platelet signalling. Upon adhesion to von Willebrand factor (VWF) or collagen, cholesterol-rich domains (CRDs) accumulate in filopodial extensions and selectively harbour counterpart receptors (GPIb and GPVI) and associated signalling molecules. In the present study we have addressed the role of membrane cholesterol in Ca(2+) signalling and secretion during the interaction of platelets with VWF and collagen. VWF/ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation was delayed after treatment with methyl beta-cyclodextrin (mbCD), but the maximal aggregation response was not affected. Platelet spreading but not adhesion to immobilised VWF under flow was attenuated by cholesterol removal, and accompanied by moderate lowering in the spiking Ca(2+) response. On the other hand, platelet interaction with collagen was quite sensitive to cholesterol depletion. Platelet aggregation decreased after treatment with mbCD, and Ca(2+) responses were decreased, both under static and flow conditions. Cholesterol depletion affected the secondary feedback activation via release of thromboxane A(2) and ADP. The collagen-induced secretion of alpha granules and surface translocation of P-selectin and CD63 was also critically affected by cholesterol depletion. Confocal microscopy showed localization of p-Tyr at sites of contact with substrate and other platelets, where also CRDs accumulate. Our data thus reveal a more critical role for membrane cholesterol in collagen-induced than in VWF-induced Ca(2+) signalling, and furthermore support the concept that secondary activation responses are dependent on intact CRDs.18518974
Glucocorticoid hypersensitivity as a rare but potentially fatal side effect of paediatric asthma treatment: a case report.
Lehmann Sylvia, Ott Hagen
Journal of medical case reports
Immediate-type hypersensitivity to glucocorticosteroids is rare but well known among allergists. Surprisingly, very few reports of glucocorticosteroid hypersensitivity in children exist although glucocorticosteroid treatment is particularly common in this age group.
We report the case of a 2-year-old boy who developed generalized urticaria, facial angio-oedema, nausea and severe dyspnoea after intravenous application of prednisolone-21-hydrogen succinate. Skin prick testing with prednisolone-21-hydrogen succinate elicited a positive result; no reactions were observed to prednisone, betamethasone or dexamethasone. While fluorescence enzyme immunoassay analysis revealed no specific IgE antibodies against prednisolone-21-hydrogen succinate, CD63-based basophil activation testing with the culprit drug prednisolone-21-hydrogen succinate was positive. In contrast, additional incubation of basophils with prednisone, betamethasone and dexamethasone did not elicit any significant response. Hence, we performed an oral provocation test with betamethasone and a titrated intravenous dexamethasone challenge. As both drugs were tolerated without any complications they were recommended for future treatment.
In a child with confirmed immediate-type hypersensitivity to glucocorticosteroids, it is still not possible to predict which glucocorticosteroid might be tolerated by solely relying on clinical history or results of skin and in vitro testing. Therefore, incremental glucocorticosteroid challenges under standardized clinical conditions remain necessary in order to facilitate a patient-tailored emergency treatment and to avoid severe reactions to glucocorticosteroids in these patients.18503138
Effects of desmopressin on platelet membrane glycoproteins and platelet aggregation in volunteers on clopidogrel.
Leithäuser B, Zielske D, Seyfert U T, Jung F
Clinical hemorheology and microcirculation
The use of clopidogrel is standard in interventional cardiology. Haemorrhage occurs in some patients, which implies a need for a non-transfusional therapy. Desmopressin showed its efficacy as an antidote of acetylsalicylic acid. In this trial the effects of desmopressin on platelet glycoproteins and the platelet's ability to aggregate under the influence of clopidogrel are studied.
The trial was conducted as an open, prospective, single-centre, randomised pilot study with n=17 healthy volunteers in a parallel-group design. 1 h after an oral loading dose of 375 mg clopidogrel the effects of a single-dose of 300 mug of Octostim nasal spray (n=9) on platelet aggregation, activity of platelets on the density of membrane-bound receptors are measured.
Ristocetin cofactor and platelet reactivity rose significantly after the administration of Octostim nasal spray with 31.9% and 5.3%, respectively (p=0.0329; p=0.0414). The ADP-induced platelet aggregation increased after the administration of Octostim nasal spray by approximately 20% (p=0.0564). The fraction of CD62- and CD63-positive platelets did not change after clopidogrel nor after desmopressin (p=0.4203; p=0.6774). The density of GPIIb/IIIa receptors per platelet did not change after desmopressin (p=0.9652). The density of GPIb/IX receptors per platelet rose after desmopressin without reaching the level of significance (p=0.0802). In the desmopressin group alone the receptor density rose by 5.5% (p=0.0783).
The administration of desmopressin improved the primary haemostasis when given in addition to a clopidogrel therapy. Patients undergoing a heart catheter procedure with clopidogrel might benefit from the use of desmopressin when having a bleeding episode.18498537
The need for a biological diagnosis of penicillin allergy.
Kvedariene V, Demoly P
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
18477015
Is this time for CRTH2/DP2 in a flow cytometric basophil activation test?
Monneret G
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
18432518
External calcium facilitates signalling, contractile and secretory mechanisms induced after activation of platelets by collagen.
Arderiu Gemma, Pérez-Pujol Silvia, Escolar Ginés, White James G, Díaz-Ricart Maribel
Platelets
Platelet activation leads to the initiation of intracellular signalling processes, many of which are triggered by Ca2+. We have studied the involvement of exogenous Ca2+ in platelet response to collagen activation. Platelet suspensions were prepared with and without adding external calcium in the suspension buffers. Activation with collagen (Col-I) was carried out, before and after incubation with cytochalasin B (Cyt-B) to block the actin assembly and the cytoskeletal reorganization. We evaluated changes in (i) tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins, in platelet lysates and associated with the cytoskeletal fraction, (ii) the association of contractile proteins to the cytoskeleton, (iii) expression of intraplatelet substances at the surface, and (iv) cytosolic Ca2+ levels ([Ca2+]i). Ultrastructural evaluation of platelets by electron microscopy was also performed. Platelet activation by Col-I in the absence of added Ca2+ was followed by mild association of actin and other contractile proteins, low phosphorylation of proteins at tyrosine residues, lack of expression of intraplatelet substances at the membrane, and absence of aggregation. In the presence of millimolar Ca2+, Col-I induced intense actin filament formation with association of contractile proteins with the cytoskeleton, resulting in profound morphological changes. Under these conditions, Col-I induced signalling through tyrosine phosphorylation, with increases in the [Ca2+]i, release of intragranule content and aggregation. Inhibiting actin polymerization with Cyt-B prevented all these events. Our data indicates that platelet activation by collagen requires external Ca2+. Studies with Cyt-B indicate that assembly of new actin and cytoskeleton-mediated contraction, both dependent on exogenous Ca2+, are key events for platelet activation by collagen. In addition, our results confirm that entrance of exogenous Ca2+ depends on a functional cytoskeleton.18426873
Late endocytic multivesicular bodies intersect the chlamydial inclusion in the absence of CD63.
Beatty Wandy L
Infection and immunity
Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens that replicate solely within a membrane-bound vacuole termed an inclusion. Within the confines of the inclusion, the replicating bacteria acquire amino acids, nucleotides, and other precursors from the host cell. Trafficking from CD63-positive multivesicular bodies to the inclusion was previously identified as a novel interaction that provided essential precursors for the maintenance of a productive intracellular infection. The present study analyzes the direct delivery of resident protein and lipid constituents of multivesicular bodies to the intracellular chlamydiae. The manipulation of this trafficking pathway with an inhibitor of multivesicular body transport and the delivery of exogenous antibodies altered protein and cholesterol acquisition and delayed the maturation of the chlamydial inclusion. Although inhibitor studies and ultrastructural analyses confirmed a novel interaction between CD63-positive multivesicular bodies and the intracellular chlamydiae, neutralization with small interfering RNAs and anti-CD63 Fab fragments revealed that CD63 itself was not required for this association. These studies confirm CD63 as a constituent in multivesicular body-to-inclusion transport; however, other requisite components of these host cell compartments must control the delivery of key nutrients that are essential to intracellular bacterial development.18415834
The efficacy of montelukast and airway mast cell profiles in patients with cough variant asthma.
Kawai Seiko, Baba Kenji, Matsubara Ayako, Shiono Hiroyuki, Okada Tadashi, Yamaguchi Etsuro
The Journal of asthma : official journal of the Association for the Care of Asthma
Cough variant asthma (CVA) is characterized by chronic cough without apparent wheezing; its pathophysiology is considered to be similar to that of classic asthma.
The clinical effects of montelukast, a cysteinyl-leukotriene receptor antagonist, on cough variant asthma were assessed, and the activation profile of airway mast cells was examined.
Montelukast (10 mg/day) was given orally to 36 CVA patients (25 women and 11 men; median age, 37.5 years). Before treatment, the patients' bronchial mucosa underwent a biopsy with a fiberoptic bronchoscope. The biopsy specimens were double stained with anti-CD63 antibody and anti-human tryptase antibody.
After 2 weeks of montelukast treatment, cough symptoms improved in 22 patients (the effective group) but did not improve in 14 patients (the ineffective group); in the ineffective group, the symptoms disappeared 2 weeks after they were switched to fluticasone propionate (400 microg/day) inhalation therapy. In the effective group, the time interval from the onset of symptoms to the initiation of treatment was significantly shorter than in the ineffective group. The bronchial mucosa biopsy specimens showed that the proportion of CD63-positive cells in tryptase-positive mast cells was significantly higher in the effective group than in the ineffective group; although the total numbers of mast cells were not different between the two groups.
There is a subgroup of CVA patients in whom leukotrienes are closely involved in the pathogenesis of their chronic cough; activation of airway mast cells may be an essential feature in these patients.18392136
Glucosamine-bound near-infrared fluorescent probes with lysosomal specificity for breast tumor imaging.
Li Cong, Greenwood Tiffany R, Glunde Kristine
Neoplasia (New York, N.Y.)
Noninvasive imaging of lysosomes will be useful 1) to elucidate the role of lysosomal parameters in cancer, 2) to diagnose malignant lesions, and 3) to evaluate future lysosome-targeted anticancer therapies. Lysosome-specific labeling of glucosamine-bound near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent probes, IR-1 and IR-2, but not control probe IR-15 without the glucosamine moiety, was observed by fluorescence microscopy in human breast epithelial cell lines. Lysosome labeling and tumor specificity of these NIR probes were investigated by dynamic optical imaging and immunofluorescence staining in human breast tumor xenografts. IR-1 and IR-2 demonstrated faster lysosome labeling rates in highly aggressive MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells compared with less aggressive MCF-7 and nontumorigenic MCF-12A cells. IR-1 and IR-2, but not IR-15, accumulated in human MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435, and MCF-7 breast tumor xenografts in vivo. IR-2 demonstrated the highest maximum fluorescence and tumor/normal tissue ratios in all tumor models. Specific lysosome labeling from IR-2 in vivo was validated by colocalization of the NIR fluorescence with CD63 immunofluorescence in tumor sections. IR-1 and IR-2 demonstrated high lysosome-labeling ability and breast tumor-targeting specificity in vitro and in vivo. They are promising for diagnosing malignant lesions and may provide a means for evaluating and monitoring future lysosome-targeted anticancer therapies.18390729
Unique effects of KIT D816V in BaF3 cells: induction of cluster formation, histamine synthesis, and early mast cell differentiation antigens.
Mayerhofer Matthias, Gleixner Karoline V, Hoelbl Andrea, Florian Stefan, Hoermann Gregor, Aichberger Karl J, Bilban Martin, Esterbauer Harald, Krauth Maria-Theresa, Sperr Wolfgang R, Longley Jack B, Kralovics Robert, Moriggl Richard, Zappulla Jacques, Liblau Roland S, Schwarzinger Ilse, Sexl Veronika, Sillaber Christian, Valent Peter
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Oncogenic tyrosine kinases (TK) usually convert growth factor-dependent cells to factor independence with autonomous proliferation. However, TK-driven neoplasms often are indolent and characterized by cell differentiation rather than proliferation. A prototype of an indolent TK-driven neoplasm is indolent systemic mastocytosis. We found that the D816V-mutated variant of KIT, a TK detectable in most patients with systemic mastocytosis, induces cluster formation and expression of several mast cell differentiation and adhesion Ags, including microphthalmia transcription factor, IL-4 receptor, histamine, CD63, and ICAM-1 in IL-3-dependent BaF3 cells. By contrast, wild-type KIT did not induce cluster formation or mast cell differentiation Ags. Additionally, KIT D816V, but not wild-type KIT, induced STAT5 activation in BaF3 cells. However, despite these intriguing effects, KIT D816V did not convert BaF3 cells to factor-independent proliferation. Correspondingly, BaF3 cells with conditional expression of KIT D816V did not form tumors in nude mice. Together, the biologic effects of KIT D816V in BaF3 cells match strikingly with the clinical course of indolent systemic mastocytosis and with our recently established transgenic mouse model, in which KIT D816V induces indolent mast cell accumulations but usually does not induce a malignant mast cell disease. Based on all these results, it is hypothesized that KIT D816V as a single hit may be sufficient to cause indolent systemic mastocytosis, whereas additional defects may be required to induce aggressive mast cell disorders.18363792
The metabolic activity of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, assessed by use of a novel inducible GFP expression system, correlates with its capacity to inhibit phagosomal maturation and acidification in human macrophages.
Lee Bai-Yu, Clemens Daniel L, Horwitz Marcus A
Molecular microbiology
Mycobacterium tuberculosis generally reside in phagosomes within human macrophages that resist maturation and acidification, but exhibit significant heterogeneity. In this study we have constructed an IPTG-inducible GFP expression system in M. tuberculosis to assess the relationship between the metabolic status of M. tuberculosis and the degree of phagosomal maturation. Using these recombinant bacteria, we have found that, in human macrophages, M. tuberculosis that respond to IPTG with expression of GFP fluorescence, and hence are metabolically active, reside in non-acidified phagosomes that have not fused with Texas red dextran pre-labelled lysosomes. In contrast, M. tuberculosis that fail to express GFP in response to IPTG, and hence are metabolically inactive, reside within acidified phagosomes that have fused with Texas red dextran labelled lysosomes. These studies demonstrate that metabolic activity of M. tuberculosis correlates strongly with phagosomal maturation and that the inducible GFP expression system is useful for assessing metabolic activity of intracellular M. tuberculosis.18341658
Activated status of basophils in chronic urticaria leads to interleukin-3 hyper-responsiveness and enhancement of histamine release induced by anti-IgE stimulus.
Lourenço F D, Azor M H, Santos J C, Prearo E, Maruta C W, Rivitti E A, Duarte A J S, Sato M N
The British journal of dermatology
Basophils and mast cells are the main target cells in chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU). Besides the basopenia, intrinsic defects of the anti-IgE cross-linking signalling pathway of basophils have been described in CIU.
We sought to investigate the profile of expression of activation markers on basophils of patients with CIU and to explore the effect of interleukin (IL)-3 priming upon anti-IgE cross-linking stimuli through expression of activation markers and basophil histamine releasability.
Evaluation of the surface expression of FcepsilonRIalpha, CD63, CD203c and CD123 on whole blood basophils of patients with CIU undergoing autologous serum skin test (ASST) was performed by flow cytometry. The effect of pretreatment with IL-3 in the anti-IgE response was analysed by the expression of basophil activation markers and histamine release using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Blood basophils of patients with CIU were reduced in number and displayed increased surface expression of FcepsilonRIalpha, which was positively correlated with the IgE serum levels. Upregulation of expression of both surface markers CD203c and CD63 was verified on basophils of patients with CIU, regardless of ASST response. High expression of IL-3 receptor on basophils was detected only in ASST+ patients with CIU. Pretreatment with IL-3 upregulated CD203c expression concomitantly with the excreting function of blood basophils and induced a quick hyper-responsiveness to anti-IgE cross-linking on basophils of patients with CIU compared with healthy controls.
Basophils of patients with CIU showed an activated profile, possibly due to an in vivo priming. Functionally, basophils have high responsiveness to IL-3 stimulation, thereby suggesting that defects in the signal transduction pathway after IgE cross-linking stimuli are recoverable in subjects with chronic urticaria.18336727
Recombinant allergens promote expression of aminopeptidase-n (CD13) on basophils in allergic patients.
Sonneck K, Baumgartner C, Rebuzzi L, Marth K, Chen K W, Hauswirth A W, Florian S, Vrtala S, Bühring H J, Valenta R, Valent P
International journal of immunopathology and pharmacology
IgE-dependent activation of basophils is associated with upregulation of several surface molecules. We recently identified the surface enzyme aminopeptidase N (CD13) as a novel activation antigen on human basophils. In the present study, we asked whether CD13 can be employed as a novel marker of allergen-induced activation of basophils in allergic individuals. Patients allergic to major allergens from grass pollen (Phl p 1, Phl p 5), birch pollen (Bet v 1), or house dust mites (Der p 2), were examined. Blood basophils were exposed to various concentrations of recombinant allergens for 15 minutes, and examined for expression of CD13 by multicolor flow cytometry. The allergen-induced upregulation of CD13 was compared with allergen-dependent increases in expression of CD63 and CD203c. Exposure to recombinant allergens resulted in an increase in expression of CD13 on basophils in all sensitized individuals, whereas no increase in CD13 was seen in healthy controls. The effects of the recombinant allergens on CD13-expression were dose- and time-dependent, were not observed in the absence of extracellular calcium, and were counteracted by preincubation of basophils with the PI3-kinase-targeting drugs staurosporin and LY294002. There was a good correlation between allergen-induced upregulation of CD13, CD63, and CD203c on basophils. In aggregate, our data show that recombinant allergens promote expression of CD13 on basophils in sensitized individuals. The functional significance and diagnostic implications of this observation remain to be determined.18334635
Profound functional and signaling changes in viable inflammatory neutrophils homing to cystic fibrosis airways.
Tirouvanziam Rabindra, Gernez Yael, Conrad Carol K, Moss Richard B, Schrijver Iris, Dunn Colleen E, Davies Zoe A, Herzenberg Leonore A, Herzenberg Leonard A
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
Blood neutrophils recruited to cystic fibrosis (CF) airways are believed to be rapidly killed by resident bacteria and to passively release elastase and other toxic by-products that promote disease progression. By single-cell analysis, we demonstrate that profound functional and signaling changes readily occur within viable neutrophils recruited to CF airways, compared with their blood counterparts. Airway neutrophils have undergone conventional activation, as shown by decreased intracellular glutathione, increased lipid raft assembly, surface mobilization of CD11b+ and CD66b+ granules, and increased levels of the cytoskeleton-associated phospho-Syk kinase. Unexpectedly, they also mobilize to the surface CD63+ elastase-rich granules, usually confined intracellularly, and lose surface expression of CD16 and CD14, both key receptors in phagocytosis. Furthermore, they express CD80, major histocompatibility complex type II, and the prostaglandin D2 receptor CD294, all normally associated with other lineages, which reflects functional reprogramming. This notion is reinforced by their decreased total phosphotyrosine levels, mirroring a postactivated stage, and increased levels of the phospho-S6 ribosomal protein, a key anabolic switch. Thus, we identified a subset of neutrophils within CF airways with a viable but dysfunctional phenotype. This subset provides a possible therapeutic target and indicates a need to revisit current paradigms of CF airway disease.18331528
Expression of pemphigus-autoantigen desmoglein 1 in human thymus.
Mouquet H, Berrih-Aknin S, Bismuth J, Joly P, Gilbert D, Tron F
Tissue antigens
Desmoglein (Dsg) 1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein of the desmosome allowing cell-cell adhesion between keratinocytes, whose expression is restricted to stratified squamous epithelia-like epidermis. Dsg1 is the target autoantigen of pathogenic autoantibodies produced by pemphigus foliaceus and 50% of pemphigus vulgaris patients in a Dsg1-specific T-cell-dependent pathway. Herewith, we show that mRNA of the DSG1 gene is present in normal human thymus and show by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis that the expression of DSG1 transcript increases with age. Although immunoblot analysis on human thymus extracts using different anti-Dsg1 antibodies did not allow to detect the protein, we show by double-immunofluorescence assay that Dsg1 is expressed at protein level by CD19+ CD63+ cells located in the medulla. These data provide another illustration of the thymic expression of a tissue-specific autoantigen involved in an organ-specific autoimmune disease, which may participate in the tolerance acquisition and/or regulation of Dsg1-specific T cells.18331364
Comparison of two basophil activation markers CD63 and CD203c in the diagnosis of amoxicillin allergy.
Abuaf N, Rostane H, Rajoely B, Gaouar H, Autegarden J E, Leynadier F, Girot R
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
To confirm allergy to beta-lactam (BL), a basophil activation test in flow cytometry based on CD63 up-regulation was described. CD203c is a more recent basophil activation marker and up to day there is no consensus about which marker is the more sensitive one. CD203c has not yet been evaluated in the diagnosis of BL allergy.
The aim of the study was to compare the reliability of CD203c to CD63 for the diagnosis of amoxicillin (AX) allergy, which is nowadays the most frequent BL allergy.
Twenty-seven patients with an immediate positive skin test (ST) to AX, 20 had had anaphylaxis with AX and 7 had urticaria and/or angioedema, were compared with 14 controls with no allergy to BL and to six patients with delayed positive ST to AX.
In the anaphylaxis group, AX induced up-regulation of CD203c in the basophils of 12 patients out of 20 (60%) and of CD63 in four patients (20%) (P<0.02). Two patients out of seven with urticaria or angioedema had a positive result with CD203c and CD63. In patients who had anaphylaxis, ampicillin (AMP) induced CD203c up-regulation in eight out of 12 (67%) patients tested, and CD63 up-regulation in 4 out of 12 (33%) (all patients who had anaphylaxis could not be tested with AMP). False-positive results were observed with CD203c as well as CD63, and for 10 patients indeed this was confirmed by a negative drug provocation test. The origin of conflicting results between CD63 and CD203c might be at least the targeting of basophils based on anti-IgE labelling. Among IgE(+) gated cells, by means of CD33, a marker of monocytes, a contamination up to 50% by monocytes was detected. In contrast to CD63, CD203c is an activation marker specific of basophils with a basal low-level expression in resting basophils. Thus, IgE and CD203c double targeting of basophils avoids the contamination by monocytes.
CD203c seems to be a more sensitive activation marker of basophils than CD63 for the diagnosis of amoxicillin allergy.18328520
Receptor-independent, vacuolar ATPase-mediated cellular uptake of histamine receptor-1 ligands: possible origin of pharmacological distortions and side effects.
Morissette Guillaume, Lodge Robert, Bouthillier Johanne, Marceau François
Toxicology and applied pharmacology
The aims of this study were to investigate whether several histamine receptor agonists and antagonists are subjected to receptor-independent ion trapping into acidic organelles, and whether this sequestration influences their pharmacological or toxicological properties. Vacuolar (V)-ATPase-dependent intracellular sequestration of agonists was recognized as morphological alterations (large fluid-filled vacuoles for betahistine and 1-methylhistamine, granular uptake for fluorescent BODIPY FL histamine) prevented by the specific V-ATPase inhibitor bafilomycin A1 in rabbit vascular smooth muscle cells. Lipophilicity was the major determinant of these cellular effects (order of potency: BODIPY FL histamine>betahistine>1-methylhistamine>histamine) that occurred at high concentrations. This ranking was dissociable from the potency order for H(1) receptor-mediated contraction of the rabbit aorta, a response uninfluenced by bafilomycin. Antihistamines are inherently more lipophilic and caused vacuolization of a proportion of cells at 5-500 microM. Agonist or antagonist-induced vacuoles were of macroautophagic nature (labeled with GFP-conjugated LC3, Rab7 and CD63; detection of LC3 II). Further, the 2 most lipophilic antihistamines tested, astemizole and terfenadine, were potentiated by V-ATPase blockade in the aortic contractility assay (13- and 3.6-fold more potent, respectively, pA(2) scale), suggesting that V-ATPase-mediated cation trapping sequesters these antagonists from the vicinity of H(1) receptors in the therapeutic concentration range. This potentiation did not apply to less lipophilic antagonists (pyrilamine, diphenhydramine). While some agonists and all tested antagonists of the histamine H(1) receptors induce the V-ATPase-dependent vacuolar and autophagic cytopathology, sequestration affects the pharmacology of only the most lipophilic antagonists, the ones prone to off-target arrhythmogenic side effects.18321974
CD63 is not required for production of infectious human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in human macrophages.
Ruiz-Mateos Ezequiel, Pelchen-Matthews Annegret, Deneka Magdalena, Marsh Mark
Journal of virology
During the assembly of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) particles, the tetraspanin CD63 can be incorporated into the viral membrane. Indeed, cell surface tetraspanin microdomains that include CD63 have been proposed as sites for virus release. In addition, antibodies against CD63 can inhibit HIV infection of macrophages. In this cell type, HIV assembles into intracellularly sequestered plasma membrane domains that contain several other tetraspanins, including CD81, CD9, and CD53. CD63 is recruited to this domain following HIV infection. Together, these observations suggest that CD63 may have some function in the assembly of infectious virus particles and/or the infectivity of assembled virions. Here we have used RNA interference to knock down CD63 expression in monocyte-derived primary macrophages. We show that in the absence of CD63, HIV assembly is quantitatively comparable to that seen in CD63-expressing macrophages and that virus assembly occurs on compartments positive for CD81, CD9, and CD53. Moreover, the infectivity of macrophage-derived virus is unaffected by the loss of CD63. Together, our results indicate that at least in tissue culture, CD63 expression is not required for either the production or the infectivity of HIV-1.18315436
Osteogenic and adipogenic induction potential of human periodontal cells.
Zhou Yefang, Hutmacher Dietmar W, Sae-Lim Varawan, Zhou Zhihong, Woodruff Maria, Lim Tit Meng
Journal of periodontology
Human periodontium contains different cell types that have various potential roles in hard and soft tissue regeneration. However, there is limited knowledge about how these diverse cell populations contribute to the regenerative process. In this study, we investigated the surface marker difference between different periodontal cells (alveolar osteoblasts [AOs], periodontal ligament fibroblasts [PDLFs], and gingival fibroblasts [GFs]) and their differentiation potential toward osteogenic and adipogenic phenotypes.
Periodontal cells (AOs, PDLFs, and GFs) from 14 subjects were isolated. The surface antigen expression pattern of cells was analyzed by cell flow cytometry, and the molecular and histologic characterizations under osteogenic and adipogenic inductions were monitored by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and immunocytohistology.
The cell phenotypes of AOs were verified by the high expressions of CD29 and CD49a, whereas PDLFs showed distinctively low levels of CD63 and CD73. Under adipogenic induction, limited AOs formed cube-shaped adipose-like cells, whereas PDLFs formed spindle-shaped adipose-like cells. All three cell types expressed baseline osteo-related genes. AOs demonstrated the highest osteogenic ability followed by PDLFs and GFs.
Cells in alveolar bone and periodontal ligament contain osteogenic and adipogenic progenitors. These observations indicate a possible application for periodontium cells in hard or soft tissue regeneration.18309064
Cell biology. No ESCRTs for exosomes.
Marsh Mark, van Meer Gerrit
Science (New York, N.Y.)
18305041
Dominant negative inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus particle production by the nonmyristoylated form of gag.
Kawada Shigeo, Goto Toshiyuki, Haraguchi Hiyori, Ono Akira, Morikawa Yuko
Journal of virology
Myristoylation of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Gag protein is essential for membrane targeting of Gag and production of viral particles. We show here that coexpression of wild-type and nonmyristoylated forms of HIV Gag resulted in severe inhibition of viral particle production, indicating that the nonmyristoylated counterpart had a dominant negative effect on particle release. When coexpressed, the nonmyristoylated Gag partially incorporated into membrane and lipid raft fractions, likely through coassembly with the wild-type Gag. The membrane and raft associations of the wild-type Gag appeared unaffected, and yet particle production was severely impaired. When viral particles produced from the coexpressing cells were analyzed, the wild-type Gag was more abundant than the nonmyristoylated Gag. Confocal microscopy showed that both forms of Gag were diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm of coexpressing cells but that a portion of the wild-type Gag population was accumulated in EEA1- and CD63-positive endosomes. The intracellular accumulation of Gag was more frequently observed at late time points. The Gag accumulation was also observed on the cell surface protrusion. Electron microscopy of the coexpressing cells revealed budding arrest phenotypes, including the occurrence of interconnected virions on the plasma membrane, and intracellular budding. We also show that the inhibition of particle production and the Gag accumulation to endosomes were suppressed when the nucleocapsid (NC) domain was deleted from the nonmyristoylated Gag, although the NC-deleted Gag was still capable of coassembly. Overall, our data indicate that coassembly with the nonmyristoylated Gag impairs HIV particle release, a phenomenon that may involve NC-mediated Gag-Gag interaction.18295291
Intense pseudotransport of a cationic drug mediated by vacuolar ATPase: procainamide-induced autophagic cell vacuolization.
Morissette Guillaume, Lodge Robert, Marceau François
Toxicology and applied pharmacology
Cationic drugs frequently exhibit large apparent volumes of distribution, consistent with various forms of cellular sequestration. The contributions of organelles and metabolic processes that may mimic drug transport were defined in human vascular smooth muscle cells. We hypothesized that procainamide-induced vacuolar cytopathology is driven by intense pseudotransport mediated by the vacuolar (V)-ATPase and pursued the characterization of vesicular trafficking alterations in this model. Large amounts of procainamide were taken up by intact cells (maximal in 2 h, reversible upon washout, apparent KM 4.69 mM; fluorometric determination of cell-associated drug). Procainamide uptake was extensively prevented or reversed by pharmacological inhibition of the V-ATPase with bafilomycin A1 or FR 167356, decreased at low extracellular pH and preceded vacuolar cell morphology. However, the uptake of procainamide was unaffected by mitochondrial poisons that reduced the uptake of rhodamine 6G. Large vacuoles induced by millimolar procainamide were labeled with the late endosome/lysosome markers Rab7 and CD63 and the autophagy effector LC3; their osmotic formation (but not procainamide uptake) was reduced by extracellular mannitol and parallel to LC3 II formation. Procainamide-induced vacuolization is associated with defective endocytosis of fluorophore-labeled bovine serum albumin, but not with induction of the unfolded protein response. The contents of a vacuole subset slowly (> or =24 h) become positive for Nile red staining (phospholipidosis-like response). V-ATPase-driven ion trapping is a form of intense cation pseudotransport that concerns the uncharged form of the drugs, and is associated with a vacuolar, autophagic and evolutive cytopathology and profound effects on vesicular trafficking.18291621
Appearance of new tetraspanin genes during vertebrate evolution.
Garcia-España Antonio, Chung Pei-Jung, Sarkar Indra Neil, Stiner Eric, Sun Tung-Tien, Desalle Rob
Genomics
A detailed phylogenetic analysis of tetraspanins from 10 fully sequenced metazoan genomes and several fungal and protist genomes gives insight into their evolutionary origins and organization. Our analysis suggests that the superfamily can be divided into four large families. These four families-the CD family, CD63 family, uroplakin family, and RDS family-are further classified as consisting of several ortholog groups. The clustering of several ortholog groups together, such as the CD9/Tsp2/CD81 cluster, suggests functional relatedness of those ortholog groups. The fact that our studies are based on whole genome analysis enabled us to estimate not only the phylogenetic relationships among the tetraspanins, but also the first appearance in the tree of life of certain tetraspanin ortholog groups. Taken together, our data suggest that the tetraspanins are derived from a single (or a few) ancestral gene(s) through sequence divergence, rather than convergence, and that the majority of tetraspanins found in the human genome are vertebrate (21 instances), tetrapod (4 instances), or mammalian (6 instances) inventions.18289680
Isolation, expression and immunological characterization of a calcium-binding protein from Parietaria pollen.
Bonura A, Gulino L, Trapani A, Di Felice G, Tinghino R, Amoroso S, Geraci D, Valenta R, Westritschnig K, Scala E, Mari A, Colombo P
Molecular immunology
The diagnosis and therapy of allergic disorders are usually performed with crude extracts which are a heterogeneous mixture of proteins with different allergenic potency. The knowledge of the allergenic composition is a key step for diagnostic and therapeutic options. Parietaria judaica pollen represents one of the main sources of allergens in the Mediterranean area and its major allergens have already been identified (Par j 1 and Par j 2). In addition, inhibition studies performed using a calcium-binding protein (CBP) from grass pollen (Phl p 7) showed the presence of a homologue of this cross-reactive allergen in the Parietaria extract. Screening of a cDNA library allowed us to isolate a 480bp cDNA containing the information for an 87 AA long protein with high level of homology to calcium-binding proteins from other allergenic sources. It was expressed as a recombinant allergen in Escherichia coli and purified by affinity chromatography. Its expression allowed us to study the prevalence of this allergen in a population of allergic patients in southern Europe. Immunoblotting and inhibition studies showed that this allergen shares a pattern of IgE epitopes in common with other 2-EF-hand calcium-binding proteins from botanically non-related species. The immunological properties of the Pj CBP were investigated by CD63 activation assay and CFDA-SE staining. In conclusion, DNA recombinant technology allowed the isolation, expression and immunological characterization of a cross-reactive calcium-binding protein allergen from Parietaria judaica pollen.18281120
The use of fluorescence microscopy to define polymer localisation to the late endocytic compartments in cells that are targets for drug delivery.
Richardson Simon C W, Wallom Kerri-Lee, Ferguson Elaine L, Deacon Samuel P E, Davies Matthew W, Powell Alison J, Piper Robert C, Duncan Ruth
Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release Society
Macromolecular therapeutics and nano-sized drug delivery systems often require localisation to specific intracellular compartments. In particular, efficient endosomal escape, retrograde trafficking, or late endocytic/lysosomal activation are often prerequisites for pharmacological activity. The aim of this study was to define a fluorescence microscopy technique able to confirm the localisation of water-soluble polymeric carriers to late endocytic intracellular compartments. Three polymeric carriers of different molecular weight and character were studied: dextrin (Mw~50,000 g/mol), a N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA) copolymer (Mw approximately 35,000 g/mol) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) (Mw 5000 g/mol). They were labelled with Oregon Green (OG) (0.3-3 wt.%; <3% free OG in respect of total). A panel of relevant target cells were used: THP-1, ARPE-19, and MCF-7 cells, and primary bovine chondrocytes (currently being used to evaluate novel polymer therapeutics) as well as NRK and Vero cells as reference controls. Specific intracellular compartments were marked using either endocytosed physiological standards, Marine Blue (MB) or Texas-red (TxR)-Wheat germ agglutinin (WGA), TxR-Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA), TxR-dextran, ricin holotoxin, C6-7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl (NBD)-labelled ceramide and TxR-shiga toxin B chain, or post-fixation immuno-staining for early endosomal antigen 1 (EEA1), lysosomal-associated membrane proteins (LAMP-1, Lgp-120 or CD63) or the Golgi marker GM130. Co-localisation with polymer-OG conjugates confirmed transfer to discreet, late endocytic (including lysosomal) compartments in all cells types. The technique described here is a particularly powerful tool as it circumvents fixation artefacts ensuring the retention of water-soluble polymers within the vesicles they occupy.18279456
Toll-like receptor 4 ligand can differentially modulate the release of cytokines by human platelets.
Cognasse Fabrice, Hamzeh-Cognasse Hind, Lafarge Sandrine, Delezay Olivier, Pozzetto Bruno, McNicol Archie, Garraud Olivier
British journal of haematology
Blood platelets link the processes of haemostasis and inflammation. This study examined the immunomodulatory factors released by platelets after Toll-Like Receptor 4 (TLR4) engagement on their surfaces. Monoclonal anti-human FcgammaRII Ab (IV.3)-treated human platelets were cultured with TLR4 ligands in the presence or absence of blocking monoclonal antibody to human TLR4. The release of sCD62p, epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta), interleukin (IL)-8, platelet activating factor 4 (PAF4), platelet-derived growth factor, alpha, beta polypeptide (PDGF-AB), Angiogenin, RANTES (regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed, and presumably secreted) and sCD40L were measured by specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. TLR4 ligand [Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS)] bound platelet TLR4, which differentially modulates the release of cytokines by platelets. It was noted that (i) sCD62p, IL-8, EGF and TGFbeta release were each independent of platelet activation after TLR4 engagement; (ii) RANTES, Angiogenin and PDGF-AB concentration were weaker in platelet supernatant after TLR4 engagement; (iii) sCD40L and PAF4 are present in large concentration in the releaseate of platelets stimulated by TLR4 ligand. The effects of LPS from E. coli on the modulation of secretory factors were attenuated by preincubation of platelets with an anti-TLR4 monoclonal antibody, consistent with the immunomodulation being specifically mediated by the TLR4 receptor. We propose that platelets adapt the subsequent responses, with polarized cytokine secretion, after TLR4 involvement.18270492
Basophil sensitivity in patients not responding to venom immunotherapy.
Peternelj Andreja, Silar Mira, Erzen Renato, Kosnik Mitja, Korosec Peter
International archives of allergy and immunology
Treatment failure of venom immunotherapy (VIT) is not rare and the risk and pathogenic factors for those failures are so far poorly understood. For that reason we evaluated allergen-specific basophil sensitivity in patients who did not tolerate field re-stings after completed VIT treatment.
Basophil responsiveness was evaluated by flow cytometry analyses of basophil CD63 surface expression induced by different concentrations of bee or wasp venom (1, 0.1 and 0.01 microg/ml) in 14 treated patients who had experienced systemic allergic reactions (Muller grades II-III) and 17 treated patients who had no reactions after the field re-stings. We also included a group of 28 Hymenoptera venom-allergic patients who had not received VIT.
In 14 patients who still reacted to bee or wasp sting, basophil response at a venom concentration of 0.1 microg/ml was significantly higher than in patients who tolerated field re-stings (p = 0.03; t test). Basophil response was also slightly higher at a concentration of 1 microg/ml, but not to statistical significance (p = 0.12; t test). There was no difference in the response to direct cross-linking of the IgE and in venom-specific IgE and IgG4 serum concentrations between those 2 groups (p > 0.8; Fisher's exact test, t test). Patients who tolerated field re-stings have also significantly lower basophil response in comparison to patients who had not received VIT, both at 0.1 and 1 microg/ml of venom concentrations (p < 0.001; t test).
The results suggest that basophil venom-specific sensitivity is associated with the efficiency of VIT.
(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel18270265
The tumour-associated antigen L6 (L6-Ag) is recruited to the tetraspanin-enriched microdomains: implication for tumour cell motility.
Lekishvili Tamara, Fromm Elisa, Mujoomdar Michelle, Berditchevski Fedor
Journal of cell science
Tumour-associated antigen L6 (L6-Ag, also known as TM4SF1) regulates tumour cell motility and invasiveness. We found that L6-Ag is abundant on the plasma membrane and on intracellular vesicles, on which it is co-localised with the markers for late endosomal/lysosomal compartments, including Lamp1/Lamp2 proteins and LBPA. Antibody internalisation and live-imaging experiments suggested that L6-Ag is targeted to late endocytic organelles (LEO) predominantly via a biosynthetic pathway. Mapping experiments showed that the presence of transmembrane regions is sufficient for directing L6-Ag to LEO. On the plasma membrane, L6-Ag is associated with tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TERM). All three predicted cytoplasmic regions of L6-Ag are crucial for the effective recruitment of the protein to TERM. Recruitment to TERM correlated with the pro-migratory activity of L6-Ag. Depletion of L6-Ag with siRNA has a selective effect on the surface expression of tetraspanins CD63 and CD82. By contrast, the expression levels of other tetraspanins and beta1 integrins was not affected. We found that L6-Ag is ubiquitylated and that ubiquitylation is essential for its function in cell migration. These data suggest that L6-Ag influences cell motility via TERM by regulating the surface presentation and endocytosis of some of their components.18268385
Diagnostic tests based on human basophils: more potentials and perspectives than pitfalls.
de Weck A L, Sanz M L, Gamboa P M, Aberer W, Bienvenu J, Blanca M, Demoly P, Ebo D G, Mayorga L, Monneret G, Sainte-Laudy J
International archives of allergy and immunology
For the diagnosis of allergy, cellular basophil activation tests (BAT), e.g. histamine or sulfidoleukotriene release tests, have long been introduced, but the expression of basophil activation markers such as CD63 and CD203c detected by flow cytometry has attracted more recent attention. A recent opinion paper in this Journal has stressed not only the potential but also the possible pitfalls of flow-cytometric BAT. We have applied clinical validation of various BAT in various ways for several years, and our experience shows that these new technologies have more potentials and perspectives than pitfalls. A comprehensive review of clinically validated studies on allergy to aeroallergens, insect venoms, latex, food allergens and drugs, e.g. myorelaxants, beta-lactams, pyrazolones and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as well as chronic urticaria shows clearly that even with different protocols, reproducible and meaningful results can be obtained. Although the available technologies may still be optimized and better standardized, there are no serious reasons to deprive allergic patients of clinically indicated BAT, which can be performed reliably by any laboratory with allergy and flow-cytometric capacity and expertise.
(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel18266832
Analysis of basophil activation by flow cytometry in pediatric house dust mite allergy.
González-Muñoz Miguel, Villota Julian, Moneo Ignacio
Pediatric allergy and immunology : official publication of the European Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology
Detection of allergen-induced basophil activation by flow cytometry has been shown to be a useful tool for allergy diagnosis. The aim of this study was to assess the potential of this technique for the diagnosis of pediatric house dust mite allergy. Quantification of total and specific IgE and basophil activation test were performed to evaluate mite allergic (n = 24), atopic (n = 23), and non-allergic children (n = 9). Allergen-induced basophil activation was detected as a CD63-upregulation. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve analysis was performed to calculate the optimal cut-off value of activated basophils discriminating mite allergic and non-allergic children. ROC curve analysis yielded a threshold value of 18% activated basophils when mite-sensitized and atopic children were studied [area under the curve (AUC) = 0.99, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.97-1.01, p < 0.001] with a sensitivity and specificity of 96% for 16 microg/ml mite extract. Analysis of the data obtained with 1.6 microg/ml mite extract defined a cut-off value of 8% activated basophils (AUC = 0.96, 95% CI = 0.91-1.01; p < 0.001) with a sensitivity of 82% and specificity of 100%. Comparison between mite allergic and non-allergic children produced a cut-off of 8% activated basophils (AUC = 1.0) with 16 microg/ml allergen extract and a sensitivity and specificity of 100%. The same threshold and specificity values were obtained with 1.6 microg/ml extract (AUC = 97%, 95% CI = 0.92-1.02; p < 0.001) but sensitivity decreased to 83%. Two atopic children showed negative skin prick and basophil activation tests and high specific IgE (>43 kU/l) values for Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus allergen. They also showed positive prick (wheal diameter >1.0 cm) and basophil activation (>87%) tests and high specific IgE (>100 kU/l) with shrimp allergen. Shrimp sensitization was demonstrated by high levels of Pen a 1-specific IgE (>100 kU/l). Cross-reactivity between mite and shrimp was confirmed by fluorescence enzyme immunoassay (FEIA-CAP) inhibition study in these two cases. This study demonstrated that the analysis of allergen-induced CD63 upregulation by flow cytometry is a reliable tool for diagnosis of mite allergy in pediatric patients, with sensitivity similar to routine diagnostic tests and a higher specificity. Furthermore, this method can provide additional information in case of disagreement between in vivo and in vitro test results.18266300
Oxidized phospholipids induce anergy in human peripheral blood T cells.
Seyerl Maria, Blüml Stefan, Kirchberger Stefanie, Bochkov Valery N, Oskolkova Olga, Majdic Otto, Stöckl Johannes
European journal of immunology
Lipids are key regulators of immune responses. In this study we investigated the direct impact of oxidized phospholipids (ox-PL) on T cell activation and function. We could demonstrate that ox-PL strongly inhibit proliferation of purified human T cells induced with anti-CD3/CD28 or anti-CD3/CD63 mAb, whereas proliferation of naive T cells from human cord blood was not affected by ox-PL. Unoxidized phospholipids showed no such effect. Inhibition of T cell proliferation by ox-PL was not due to cell death. Moreover, T cell proliferation triggered by PMA/ionomycin activation was not diminished by ox-PL. T cells activated in the presence of ox-PL produced and released low amounts of IFN-gamma and IL-2, whereas IL-4 was only slightly diminished. Ox-PL prevented the expression of de novo synthesized activation markers (CD25, MHC class II) but not expression of CD63 or CD69. We further observed that T cells stimulated in the presence of ox-PL are poorly cytotoxic T cells. Most importantly, T cells activated in the presence of ox-PL failed to proliferate in response to restimulation. This hypo-proliferative state was accompanied with an up-regulation of early growth response gene 3 and Casitas B-lineage lymphoma protein B. Taken together, our results demonstrate that ox-PL are potent and specific regulators of T cell activation and function.18257777
The effects of maximal treadmill graded exercise testing on haemorheological, haemodynamic and flow cytometry platelet markers in patients with systolic or diastolic heart failure.
Chung I, Goyal D, Macfadyen R J, Lip G Y H
European journal of clinical investigation
Acute exercise has been associated with activation of thrombosis, and this risk may be accentuated in patients with heart failure. Given the relation of platelets to atherothrombosis, we tested the hypothesis that acute exercise would adversely affect platelet indices and platelet activation markers in patients with systolic and diastolic heart failure.
We studied 20 patients with systolic heart failure (17 men, 3 women; mean age 64 +/- 10 years, all with ejection fraction (EF) < or = 40%) and 20 patients with diastolic heart failure (14 men, 6 women; mean age 64 +/- 8 years, mean EF = 66%) who were exercised to maximal intensity, who were compared to 13 healthy controls (6 men, 7 women; mean age 60 +/- 4 years, mean EF = 73%). We measured platelet indices (platelet volume, mass and component) and platelet activation markers (platelet-bound CD62P%G, CD63%G and CD40L%G using flow cytometry, as well as plasma sCD40L and soluble P-selectin (sP-sel) levels).
Baseline Mean Platelet Volume (MPV), sP-sel, CD40L%G and CD63%G levels were significantly higher in patients with systolic and diastolic heart failure, when compared with controls. The mean exercise duration and VO(2 )peak in patients with systolic and diastolic heart failure were not significantly different, but lower than that seen in healthy controls. Following exercise, mean haematocrit, CD62P%G, and CD63%G significantly increased in all three subject groups (all P < 0.05). The proportional change in CD62P%G and CD63%G were not significantly different between healthy controls and heart failure patients (P > 0.05).
Acute maximal graded exercise increases platelet activation markers, with no disproportionate differences between heart failure patients and healthy controls, despite the former group having a lower exercise tolerance and VO2 peak.18252862
Selective release of molecules from Weibel-Palade bodies during a lingering kiss.
Babich Victor, Meli Athinoula, Knipe Laura, Dempster John E, Skehel Paul, Hannah Matthew J, Carter Tom
Blood
Exocytosis of specialized endothelial cell secretory organelles, Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs), is thought to play an important role in regulating hemostasis and intravascular inflammation. The major WPB core proteins are Von Willebrand factor (VWF) and its propolypeptide (Proregion), constituting more than 95% of the content. Although the composition of the WPBs can be fine-tuned to include cytokines and chemokines (eg, interleukin-8 [IL-8] and eotaxin-3), it is generally assumed that WPB exocytosis is inextricably associated with secretion of VWF. Here we show that WPBs can undergo a form of exocytosis during which VWF and Proregion are retained while smaller molecules, such as IL-8, are released. Imaging individual WPBs containing fluorescent cargo molecules revealed that during weak stimulation approximately 25% of fusion events result in a failure to release VWF or Proregion. The WPB membrane protein P-selectin was also retained; however, the membrane tetraspannin CD63 was released. Accumulation or exclusion of extracellular fluorescent dextran molecules ranging from 3 kDa to 2 mDa show that these events arise due to the formation of a fusion pore approximately 12 nm in diameter. The pore behaves as a molecular filter, allowing selective release of WPB core and membrane proteins. WPB exocytosis is not inextricably associated with secretion of VWF.18248626
The Delta fbpA mutant derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv has an enhanced susceptibility to intracellular antimicrobial oxidative mechanisms, undergoes limited phagosome maturation and activates macrophages and dendritic cells.
Katti Muralidhar K, Dai Guixiang, Armitige Lisa Y, Rivera Marrero Carlos, Daniel Sundarsingh, Singh Christopher R, Lindsey Devin R, Dhandayuthapani Subramanian, Hunter Robert L, Jagannath Chinnaswamy
Cellular microbiology
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv (Mtb) excludes phagocyte oxidase (phox) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) while preventing lysosomal fusion in macrophages (MPhis). The antigen 85A deficient (Delta fbpA) mutant of Mtb was vaccinogenic in mice and the mechanisms of attenuation were compared with MPhis infected with H37Rv and BCG. Delta fbpA contained reduced amounts of trehalose 6, 6, dimycolate and induced minimal levels of SOCS-1 in MPhis. Blockade of oxidants enhanced the growth of Delta fbpA in MPhis that correlated with increased colocalization with phox and iNOS. Green fluorescent protein-expressing strains within MPhis or purified phagosomes were analysed for endosomal traffick with immunofluorescence and Western blot. Delta fbpA phagosomes were enriched for rab5, rab11, LAMP-1 and Hck suggesting enhanced fusion with early, recycling and late endosomes in MPhis compared with BCG or H37Rv. Delta fbpA phagosomes were thus more mature than H37Rv or BCG although, they failed to acquire rab7 and CD63 preventing lysosomal fusion. Finally, Delta fbpA infected MPhis and dendritic cells (DCs) showed an enhanced MHC-II and CD1d expression and primed immune T cells to release more IFN-gamma compared with those infected with BCG and H37Rv. Delta fbpA was thus more immunogenic in MPhis and DCs because of an enhanced susceptibility to oxidants and increased maturation.18247078
The significance of platelet activation in ankylosing spondylitis.
Wang Feng, Yan Chun-Gen, Xiang Hai-Yan, Xing Tao, Wang Nian-Song
Clinical rheumatology
The objective of this study was to explore the significance of platelet activation in patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS). Thirty-five AS patients and 15 normal controls were selected from November 2005 to October 2006. The number of CD62P- and CD63-positive cells were detected by flow cytometry. At the same time, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), platelet count (PLT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were determined in both groups. The percentage of CD62P-positive cell in AS patients (13.60 +/- 7.64%) was significantly higher than that in control group (2.78 +/- 1.04%; P < 0.01). The percentage of CD63-positive cell in AS patients (6.92 +/- 4.16%) was significantly higher than that in control group (4.13 +/- 1.85%; P < 0.05). The levels of CRP (20.18 +/- 23.17 mg/l), PLT (259.54 +/- 102.59 x 10(9)/l) and ESR (36.86 +/- 31.23 mm/h) in AS patients were higher than those in normal controls, respectively (3.21 +/- 2.18 mg/l, P < 0.01; 197.00 +/- 55.70 x 10(9)/l, P < 0.01; 12.25 +/- 5.05 mm/h, P < 0.05). Platelet activation may be a sign of AS exacerbation.18220977
Tetraspanins-structural and signalling scaffolds that regulate platelet function.
Goschnick Matt W, Jackson Denise E
Mini reviews in medicinal chemistry
There are several tetraspanins present in platelets including CD9, CD151, TSSC6, and CD63. Recent studies in knockout mouse models have revealed that CD151 and TSSC6 are physically and functionally involved in regulation of the 'outside-in' signalling properties of the major platelet integrin, integrin alpha(IIb)beta(3) and thrombus stability in vivo.18217151
Impact of cytochrome P450 3A4-metabolized statins on the antiplatelet effect of a 600-mg loading dose clopidogrel and on clinical outcome in patients undergoing elective coronary stent placement.
Trenk Dietmar, Hochholzer Willibald, Frundi Devine, Stratz Christian, Valina Christian M, Bestehorn Hans-Peter, Büttner Heinz Joachim, Neumann Franz-Josef
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Early studies suggested interactions between statins and clopidogrel. Based on the outcome and platelet data, there is now huge evidence of no interactions between statins and 75 to 300 mg clopidogrel; however, data with 600-mg loading are lacking. In a pre-specified analysis of the EXCELSIOR cohort, we investigated the interaction between statins, especially cytochrome P4503A4-metabolized atorvastatin and simvastatin, and the antiplatelet effects of a 600-mg loading dose of clopidogrel. We analyzed 1,395 patients scheduled for coronary angiography (CA). Patients received clopidogrel 600 mg at least two hours before CA and 75 mg daily thereafter in case of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Statin medication on admission was continued unaltered until discharge. Platelet function was assessed by optical aggregometry and flow cytometry of adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-stimulated surface expression of CD62P, CD63 and PAC-1 before clopidogrel and immediately before CA. Residual platelet aggregation (RPA) after addition of ADP 5 muM was similar irrespective of statin treatment at baseline (p = 0.968). RPA at CA was 46.2 +/- 16.8% in patients without statin (n = 682), 45.5 +/- 17.0% in patients with atorvastatin (n = 255), 45.8 +/- 16.3% with simvastatin (n = 335), 47.3 +/- 14.9% with fluvastatin (n = 42) and 45.9 +/- 16.2% with pravastatin (n = 81; p = 0.962). Consistent results were obtained by flow cytometry. In patients with PCI (n = 553), the one-year incidence of death, myocardial infarction and target lesion reintervention did not differ between cohorts stratified according to statin co-medication (p = 0.645). Thus, peri-interventional atorvastatin and simvastatin had no effect on the antiplatelet activity of a loading dose of clopidogrel 600 mg and did not affect clinical outcome after PCI.18211905
Expression of tetraspan protein CD63 activates protein-tyrosine kinase (PTK) and enhances the PTK-induced inhibition of ROMK channels.
Lin Daohong, Kamsteeg Erik-Jan, Zhang Yan, Jin Yan, Sterling Hyacinth, Yue Peng, Roos Marcel, Duffield Amy, Spencer Joanna, Caplan Michael, Wang Wen-Hui
The Journal of biological chemistry
In the present study, we tested the role of CD63 in regulating ROMK1 channels by protein-tyrosine kinase (PTK). Immunocytochemical staining shows that CD63 and receptor-linked tyrosine phosphatase alpha (RPTPalpha) are expressed in the cortical collecting duct and outer medulla collecting duct. Immunoprecipitation of tissue lysates from renal cortex and outer medulla or 293T cells transfected with CD63 reveals that CD63 was associated with RPTPalpha both in situ and in transfected cells. Expression of CD63 in 293T cells stimulated the phosphorylation of tyrosine residue 416 of c-Src but decreased the phosphorylation of tyrosine residue 527, indicating that expression of CD63 stimulates the activity of c-Src. Furthermore, c-Src was coimmunoprecipitated with RPTPalpha and CD63 both in 293T cells transfected with CD63 and in lysates prepared from native rat kidney. Potassium restriction had no effect on the expression of RPTPalpha, but it increased the association between c-Src and RPTPalpha in the renal cortex and outer medulla. We also used two-electrode voltage clamp to study the effect of CD63 on ROMK channels in Xenopus oocytes. Expression of CD63 had no significant effect on potassium currents in oocytes injected with ROMK1; however, it significantly enhanced the c-Src-induced inhibition of ROMK channels in oocytes injected with ROMK1+c-Src. The effect of CD63 on the c-Src-induced inhibition was not due to a decreased expression of ROMK1 channels, because blocking PTK with herbimycin A abolished the inhibitory effect of c-Src on ROMK channels in oocytes injected with ROMK1+c-Src+CD63. Furthermore, coexpression of CD63 enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of ROMK1. We conclude that CD63 plays a role in the regulation of ROMK channels through its association with RPTPalpha, which in turn interacts with and activates Src family PTK, thus reducing ROMK activity.18211541
Systemic changes in haemostatic balance are not associated with increased levels of circulating microparticles in women with recurrent spontaneous abortion.
Toth Bettina, Nieuwland Rienk, Kern Meike, Rogenhofer Nina, Berkmans René, Rank Andreas, Lohse Peter, Friese Klaus, Thaler Christian J
American journal of reproductive immunology (New York, N.Y. : 1989)
Placental fibrin deposits in patients wih recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) indicate an exaggerated haemostatic response. This 'hypercoagulability' may involve pro-coagulant factors such as circulating microparticles (MPs). We investigated the relationship between circulating pro-coagulant MPs and systemic coagulation in RSA patients.
Platelet- and endothelial cell-derived microparticles (PMPs, EMPs) were evaluated by flow cytometry in RSA patients (n = 51) and compared to controls (n = 24) using annexin V (total numbers of MP), and antibodies against CD61, CD63 and CD62P (PMP), as well as CD144 and CD62E (EMP). Prothrombin fragment 1 + 2 (F(1+2)) and thrombin generation were determined to assess the pro-coagulant potential of MP.
Numbers of annexin V-binding MP were nearly similar in RSA patients and controls. However, a subgroup of ten RSA patients (10/51; 20%) presented with MP concentrations >10,000 x 10(6)/L, compared to only one women out of the control group (1/24; 4%; P = 0.038). Neither PMP and EMP nor F(1+2) and thrombin generation differed significantly within the study population.
The present study shows that circulating MPs are not directly associated with the extent of systemic coagulation activation in RSA patients. We hypothesize that increased numbers of circulating MPs either are only indirectly associated with coagulation during pregnancy of RSA patients, or affect abortion via mechanisms independently from hypercoagulation.18204278
Cellular in vitro assays in the diagnosis of Hymenoptera venom allergy.
Scherer K, Weber J M, Jermann T M, Krautheim A, Tas E, Ueberschlag E V, Cammarata M, Bircher A J
International archives of allergy and immunology
The current diagnostic procedures of anaphylactic reactions to hymenoptera stings include intradermal tests, venom-specific IgE (sIgE) and possibly sting challenge tests. Sometimes, the culprit insect remains unidentified. The usefulness of the cellular assays CAST-ELISA and Flow-CAST in the management of hymenoptera venom allergy was investigated.
134 patients with systemic reactions after a yellow jacket wasp and/or honey bee sting and 44 healthy controls underwent skin tests, as well as determination of sIgE (CAP-FEIA), leukocyte sulfidoleukotriene release (CAST-ELISA) and basophil CD63 expression (Flow-CAST) upon insect venom stimulation. The clinical diagnosis based on the history alone served as reference. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive value of all methods were compared. Concordance and correlations among methods were calculated.
Sensitivity and specificity of all in vitro tests were consistently high. The combination of all tests (skin tests, sIgE, combined cellular assays) yielded a positive predictive value of 100% for both venoms, if all 3 were positive, and a negative predictive value of 100%, if at least 1 test was positive. Relative specificities were considerably higher for the cellular assays (honey bee: CAST 91.1%, Flow-CAST 85.7%; yellow jacket wasp: CAST 98.4%, Flow-CAST 92.1%) and allow the detection of the culprit insect in patients with reactivity to both insects. The concordance between methods was good. There is no correlation between severity of clinical reaction and cellular assays.
CAST-ELISA and Flow-CAST are valuable additional diagnostic tools for establishing the true culprit insect in patients with unclear clinical history or sensitization to both insects.
(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.18201250
A rapid two-step procedure for the purification of human peripheral blood basophils to near homogeneity.
Gibbs B F, Papenfuss K, Falcone F H
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Basophils are increasingly utilized as indicators of allergic inflammation and as primary allergic effector cells to study signalling pathways. However, until the present, their enrichment has been time consuming, costly and limited to relatively few specialized laboratories.
We have therefore devised a reproducible and rapid method for the purification of human basophils from small quantities of peripheral blood within 1.5 h, which does not require the use of specialized equipment such as elutriators.
Human basophils were obtained from healthy volunteers undergoing venipuncture. Heparinized or K3-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid blood samples were first subjected to centrifugation in Hetasep, directly followed by negative selection using immunomagnetic beads. Basophil morphology and purity were assessed by May-Grünwald staining of cytospins. IgE-mediated histamine release was analysed spectrofluorometrically and IL-4 and IL-13 production by quantitative RT-PCR. CD203c and CD63 surface expression was measured using flow cytometry before and after activation with anti-IgE.
Using this protocol, basophils were enriched close to homogeneity in most cases with a mean purity of 99.34+/-0.88% (range 97-100%, n=18) and a mean recovery of 75.6 (range 39-100%, n=8). Basophil viability following purification was 99.6+/-0.89% using Trypan blue exclusion. The purification procedure gave rise to basophils with normal functional responses to anti-IgE regarding histamine release as well as IL-4 and IL-13 mRNA expression. Moreover, constitutive cell-surface CD203c/CD63 expressions were not elevated before anti-IgE stimulation.
The rapidity, simplicity and reproducibility of this method will facilitate the employment of basophils in high-output ex vivo studies.18198639
[Effect of tetramethylpyrazine on platelet activation and vascular endothelial function in patients with acute coronary syndrome undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention].
Chen Zhang-Qiang, Hong Lang, Wang Hong
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban
To explore the effect of tetramethylpyrazine (TMP) on platelet activation and vascular endothelial function after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
Eighty patients with ACS were assigned to the TMP group (40 patients) and the control group (40 patients). Before and at the next day of PCI, patient's expressions of the indices of platelet activation CD62p, CD63 and glucose protein (GP) II b/III a were tested by flow cytometry, von Willebrand (vWF) by ELISA, endothelin-1 (ET-1) by RIA, and plasma content of nitrogen oxide (NO) were determined by enzyme reaction, at the same time, the flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) in brachial artery was measured as well using color Doppler. All the afore mentioned indexes were reexamined for comparing when patients in the TMP group received TMP treatment for 14 days.
Before PCI blood levels of CD62p, CD63, GP II b/III a, vWF and ET-1 expression increased significantly (all P < 0.01), FMD and NO decreased significantly (P < 0.01) in ACS patients, as compared with those in the healthy control. After PCI, level of vWF increased significantly (P < 0.05), FMD decreased significantly (P < 0.05), while CD62p, CD63, GP II b/III a, ET-1 and NO changed insignificantly (P > 0.05). As compared with the control group, levels of CD62p, CD63, GP II b/III a, vWF and ET-1 decreased significantly (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01), FMD increased significantly (P < 0.05) in the TMP group.
TMP can be useful for preventing and treating the intra-coronary thrombosis and protect the vascular endothelial function in patients undergoing PCI.18194419
Fluoxetine (Prozac) augments platelet activation mediated through protease-activated receptors.
Dilks J R, Flaumenhaft R
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
18194377
Small-molecule complement inhibitors cannot prevent the development of the platelet storage lesion.
Bradley Amanda J, Read Brandi L, Levin Elena, Devine Dana V
Transfusion
Suppression of the platelet (PLT) storage lesion would maintain PLT quality over longer storage times. An increased storage period would greatly improve the ability of blood agencies and hospitals to manage PLT inventories and minimize product wastage. Activation of the complement system has been proposed to play a role in initiating or potentiating the PLT storage lesion. This study examines the effect of complement inhibition on the development of the PLT storage lesion.
Leukofiltered PLT concentrates (PCs) were split into miniunits containing the complement inhibitors N-acetylaspartylglutamic acid (NAAGA) or compstatin, a control peptide, or saline. Samples were collected up to Day 11 of storage. Complement activation was monitored as C3a generation. PLT quality was assessed by morphology, CD62 and CD63 expression, fibrinogen binding, pH, mean PLT volume, annexin V binding, and PLT viability. Caspase-3 activity served as a measure of PLT apoptosis.
At concentrations of NAAGA required to achieve approximately 50 percent complement inhibition, PLT activation, and caspase-3 activity were increased. Complement inhibition by compstatin was highly variable. Compstatin addition consistently resulted in a 37 to 55 percent inhibition of PLT caspase-3 activity, but PLT quality and viability were no different between compstatin PCs and control PCs over the storage time.
Neither NAAGA nor compstatin provided complete inhibition of complement over the storage period. Addition of these small-peptide inhibitors to PCs did not slow PLT storage lesion development, in spite of the partial inhibition of caspase-3 activity in the compstatin-treated PCs.18190443
Acral myxoinflammatory fibroblastic sarcomas: are they all low-grade neoplasms?
Hassanein Ashraf M, Atkinson Steven P, Al-Quran Samer Z, Jain Sima M, Reith John D
Journal of cutaneous pathology
Acral myxoinflammatory fibroblastic sarcoma (AMIFS) is a low-grade sarcoma that presents mostly in distal extremities of middle-aged patients. The clinicopathologic features, immunohistochemical profile and follow-up data of five cases (three men and two women; age 39-65 years) are presented. The tumors presented as a slow-growing, poorly circumscribed, subcutaneous masses in the hands (three), foot (one) and calf (one), with dermal involvement in two cases. They had myxoid and hyaline stroma with dense acute and chronic inflammation. Spindle cells, large bizarre ganglion-like cells and multivacuolated cells were seen. Variable reactivity in lesional cells were noted for vimentin, Alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT), factor XIIIa, CD68, CD95, CD117, Alpha-1-antichymotrypsin (A1ACT), CD34, AE1/3, S-100 protein, EBER, CD63 and CD15. MIB-1 showed 5-30% nuclear labeling. They were negative for cytokeratin AE1/3, smooth muscle actin, CD30, ALK-1, EMA, desmin, CMV, HMB-45 and Melan-A. Follow up ranged from 2 weeks to 95 months (mean 54). One patient was lost to follow up; three underwent excision and one patient had below the knee amputation. Two patients developed metastases (one died of disease), and two patients are alive without evidence of disease. AMIFS are rare tumors that may involve joints and tendons leading to clinical diagnosis of ganglion cyst or tenosynovitis.18182005
A CD63 mutant inhibits T-cell tropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1 entry by disrupting CXCR4 trafficking to the plasma membrane.
Yoshida Takeshi, Kawano Yuji, Sato Kei, Ando Yoshinori, Aoki Jun, Miura Yoshiharu, Komano Jun, Tanaka Yuetsu, Koyanagi Yoshio
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
We have discovered that an N-terminal deletion mutant of a membrane protein, CD63, (CD63DeltaN) blocks entry of CXCR4-using, T-cell tropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (X4 HIV-1) by suppressing CXCR4 surface expression. This suppression was observed for CXCR4 but not for CD4, CCR5, CD25, CD71 or other tetraspanin proteins. The suppression of CXCR4 expression on the plasma membrane appeared to be caused by mislocalization of CXCR4 and exclusive transportation of CXCR4 toward intracellular organelles, mainly late endosomes/lysosomes. Our data suggest that CXCR4 trafficking can be modified in terms of its recruitment to the plasma membrane without enhancing the degradation or arresting vesicular transport of CXCR4.18180381
The effects of dasatinib on IgE receptor-dependent activation and histamine release in human basophils.
Kneidinger Michael, Schmidt Uwe, Rix Uwe, Gleixner Karoline V, Vales Anja, Baumgartner Christian, Lupinek Christian, Weghofer Margit, Bennett Keiryn L, Herrmann Harald, Schebesta Alexandra, Thomas Wayne R, Vrtala Susanne, Valenta Rudolf, Lee Francis Y, Ellmeier Wilfried, Superti-Furga Giulio, Valent Peter
Blood
Dasatinib is a multitargeted drug that blocks several tyrosine kinases. Apart from its well-known antileukemic activity, the drug has attracted attention because of potential immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory effects. We report that dasatinib at 1 microM completely blocks anti-IgE-induced histamine release in blood basophils in healthy donors, and allergen-induced release of histamine in sensitized individuals. In addition, dasatinib inhibited FcepsilonRI-mediated release of IL-4 and IgE-mediated up-regulation of CD13, CD63, CD164, and CD203c in basophils. The effects of dasatinib were dose-dependent (IC(50): 50-500 nM) and specific for FcepsilonRI activation in that the drug failed to inhibit C5a-induced or Ca-ionophore-induced histamine release. Interestingly, at lower concentrations, dasatinib even promoted FcepsilonRI-dependent histamine release in basophils in allergic subjects. In consecutive studies, dasatinib was found to interact with and block several FcepsilonRI downstream targets in basophils, including Btk. Correspondingly, FcepsilonRI-mediated histamine secretion in basophils was markedly reduced in Btk knockout mice and in a patient with Btk deficiency. However, the remaining "low-level" mediator secretion in Btk-deficient cells was fully blocked down again by 1 muM dasatinib. Together, these data suggest that dasatinib inhibits FcepsilonRI-mediated activation of basophils through multiple signaling molecules including Btk. Dasatinib may be an interesting agent for immunologic disorders involving Btk-dependent responses or/and FcepsilonRI activation of basophils.18088016
Hymenoptera venom allergy: taking the sting out of difficult cases.
Ebo D G, Hagendorens M M, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
Correct identification of the culprit venom is a prerequisite for specific venom immunotherapy.
To assess whether the basophil activation test (BAT) constitutes an additional diagnostic instrument in patients with equivocal or negative specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E or venom skin test (VST) results.
One hundred eighteen patients with a compelling history of IgE-mediated hymenoptera venom allergy were enrolled. Venom-specific IgE was quantified by ImmunoCAP and VST was performed in all patients. Basophil activation was analyzed by flow cytometry after labeling with anti-IgE and anti-CD63.
In 64 out of 118 patients, diagnosis was considered as definite and the entomologic description was confirmed by unequivocal and concordant positive specific IgE and VST results. In 53 of those 64 patients, BAT confirmed diagnosis, whereas the remaining 11 patients were nonresponsive in the BAT analysis. Forty-seven patients (40%) had a tentative diagnosis of venom allergy, as they had divergent specific IgE or VST results. In 31 of those patients, BAT was positive only for the suspected venom and helped to establish diagnosis of wasp and honeybee venom allergy in 28 and 3 patients, respectively. BAT was diagnostic in 7 patients with complete negative results for specific IgE and VST, despite clear entomologic identification.
In about half the patients with diagnosis of venom allergy, unequivocal specific IgE and VST results are obtained and additional tests are not needed. In the remainder, diagnosis is less straightforward due to discrepant or negative specific IgE orVST results. In these patients, BAT constitutes a helpful additional instrument to identify the culprit venom and start venom immunotherapy accordingly.18076669
HIV-1 Vpu inhibits accumulation of the envelope glycoprotein within clathrin-coated, Gag-containing endosomes.
Van Damme Nanette, Guatelli John
Cellular microbiology
Several viruses encode ion channels that both modulate the trafficking of envelope glycoprotein(s) and stimulate the release of virions from cells. HIV-1 Vpu enhances virion release and inhibits the endosomal accumulation of the viral structural protein Gag. We investigated whether Vpu affects the subcellular distribution of Env as well as Gag. Env and Vpu colocalized with each other, in part within the trans-Golgi network. In the absence of Vpu, Env accumulated more extensively within clathrin-coated endosomal structures. These structures had several features consistent with an endosomal viral assembly domain: they contained Gag, including proteolytically processed viral matrix protein; the tetraspanins CD63 and CD81; the adaptor protein complex AP-3; and AIP1/ALIX, a cellular cofactor for viral budding. These endosomes labelled incompletely with Env derived from the cell surface, suggesting that some Env reaches this compartment without transiting the plasma membrane. Consistent with this, endosomal accumulation of Env was not blocked by dominant-negative Eps15, an inhibitor of AP-2-mediated endocytosis. Although these data are potentially explained by greater endocytosis of mature virions in the absence of Vpu, they also raise the possibility that Vpu inhibits the transport of Env and Gag to late endosomes, leading to viral assembly at the plasma membrane.18070985
Proteomics analysis of Hodgkin lymphoma: identification of new players involved in the cross-talk between HRS cells and infiltrating lymphocytes.
Ma Yue, Visser Lydia, Roelofsen Han, de Vries Marcel, Diepstra Arjan, van Imhoff Gustaaf, van der Wal Tineke, Luinge Marjan, Alvarez-Llamas Gloria, Vos Hans, Poppema Sibrand, Vonk Roel, van den Berg Anke
Blood
Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) secrete factors that interact with inflammatory background cells and may serve as biomarkers for disease activity. To detect new proteins related to pathogenesis, we analyzed the secretome of HRS cells. Proteins in cell culture supernatant of 4 HL cell lines were identified using 1DGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS. In total, 1290 proteins, including 368 secreted proteins, were identified. Functional grouping of secreted proteins revealed 37 proteins involved in immune response. Sixteen of the 37 proteins (ie, ALCAM, Cathepsin C, Cathepsin S, CD100, CD150, CD26, CD44, CD63, CD71, Fractal-kine, IL1R2, IL25, IP-10, MIF, RANTES, and TARC) were validated in HL cell lines and patient material using immunohistochemistry and/or ELISA. Expression of all 16 proteins was confirmed in HL cell lines, and 15 were also confirmed in HL tissues. Seven proteins (ALCAM, cathepsin S, CD26, CD44, IL1R2, MIF, and TARC) revealed significantly elevated levels in patient plasma compared with healthy controls. Proteomics analyses of HL cell line supernatant allowed detection of new secreted proteins, which may add to our insights in the interaction between HRS cells and infiltrating lymphocytes and in some instances might serve as biomarkers.18070161
An immunoglobulin E-reactive chimeric human immunoglobulin G1 anti-idiotype inhibits basophil degranulation through cross-linking of FcepsilonRI with FcgammaRIIb.
Wigginton S J, Furtado P B, Armour K L, Clark M R, Robins A, Emara M, Ghaemmaghami A M, Sewell H F, Shakib F
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
IgE binds to mast cells and basophils via its high-affinity receptor, FcepsilonRI, and cross-linking of FcepsilonRI-bound IgE molecules by allergen leads to the release of allergic mediators characteristic of type I hypersensitivity reactions. Previous work has shown that cross-linking of FcepsilonRI with FcgammaRIIb, an ITIM-containing IgG receptor, leads to inhibition of basophil triggering. 2G10, a chimeric human IgG1 anti-idiotype, has broad reactivity with human IgE and as such has the potential to bind simultaneously to FcepsilonRI-bound IgE, via its Fab regions, and the negative regulatory receptor, FcgammaRIIb, via its Fc region.
To assess the ability of human 2G10 to inhibit anti-IgE and allergen-driven basophil degranulation through cross-linking of FcepsilonRI-bound IgE with FcgammaRIIb.
2G10 was assessed for its ability to bind to FcgammaRIIb on transfected cells and on purified basophils. In the basophil degranulation assay, basophils were purified from peripheral blood of atopic individuals and activated with either anti-IgE or the house dust mite allergen Der p 1, in the presence or absence of human 2G10. Basophil activation was quantified by analysis of CD63 and CD203c expression on the cell surface, and IL-4 expression intracellularly, using flow cytometery.
Human 2G10 was able to bind to FcgammaRIIb on transfected cells and on purified basophils, and induce a dose-dependent inhibition of both anti-IgE and Der p 1-driven degranulation of basophils.
The inhibition of basophil degranulation by the human IgG1 anti-idiotype 2G10 highlights the therapeutic potential of IgE-reactive IgG antibodies in restoring basophil integrity through recruitment of the inhibitory receptor FcgammaRIIb.18064324
Enhanced platelet aggregation and activation under conditions of hypothermia.
Xavier Ruben G, White Ann E, Fox Susan C, Wilcox Robert G, Heptinstall Stan
Thrombosis and haemostasis
The effects on platelet function of temperatures attained during hypothermia used in cardiac surgery are controversial. Here we have performed studies on platelet aggregation in whole blood and platelet-rich plasma after stimulation with a range of concentrations of ADP, TRAP, U46619 and PAF at both 28 degrees C and 37 degrees C. Spontaneous aggregation was also measured after addition of saline alone. In citrated blood, spontaneous aggregation was markedly enhanced at 28 degrees C compared with 37 degrees C. Aggregation induced by ADP was also enhanced. Similar results were obtained in hirudinised blood. There was no spontaneous aggregation in PRP but ADP-induced aggregation was enhanced at 28 degrees C. The P2Y12 antagonist AR-C69931 inhibited all spontaneous aggregation at 28 degrees C and reduced all ADP-induced aggregation responses to small, reversible responses. Aspirin had no effect. Aggregation was also enhanced at 28 degrees C compared with 37 degrees C with low but not high concentrations of TRAP and U46619. PAF-induced aggregation was maximal at all concentrations when measured at 28 degrees C, but reversal of aggregation was seen at 37 degrees C. Baseline levels of platelet CD62P and CD63 were significantly enhanced at 28 degrees C compared with 37 degrees C. Expression was significantly increased at 28 degrees C after stimulation with ADP, PAF and TRAP but not after stimulation with U46619. Overall, our results demonstrate an enhancement of platelet function at 28 degrees C compared with 37 degrees C, particularly in the presence of ADP.18063215
Anaphylaxis to vecuronium: the use of basophil CD63 expression as a possible screening tool to identify a safe alternative.
Sudheer Potteth S, Appadurai Ian R
Journal of clinical anesthesia
A 29-year-old woman with a history of anaphylaxis during anesthesia required diagnostic laparoscopic surgery for investigation of infertility. Previous laboratory investigations suggested that she had reacted to vecuronium, but she also had a specific IgE antibody to succinylcholine. The use of the basophil activation marker CD63 as a screening tool in selecting a safe muscle relaxant is presented.18053095
Caveolin-1 is transported to multi-vesicular bodies after albumin-induced endocytosis of caveolae in HepG2 cells.
Botos E, Klumperman J, Oorschot V, Igyártó B, Magyar A, Oláh M, Kiss A L
Journal of cellular and molecular medicine
Caveolae-mediated endocytosis is a highly regulated endocytic pathway that exists in parallel to other forms of clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis. Internalized caveolae accumulate in intermediate organelles called caveosomes. Here we addressed the further fate of internalized caveolae by inducing caveolae-mediated uptake of albumin by HepG2 cells. We followed the route of internalized caveolin-1 by immunogold labelling of ultrathin frozen sections and by Western blot analyses of purified membrane fractions. Long-term (1 and 3 hrs) albumin treatment resulted in the appearance of albumin-containing caveolae in special multi-caveolar complexes (consisting of multiple caveolae clustered together) connected to the plasma membrane and caveosome-like structures in the cytoplasm. In addition, numerous CD63 (LIMP-1) positive late endosomes/multi-vesicular bodies were found positive for caveolin-1, suggesting that upon albumin incubation, caveolin-1 is endocytosed and enters the degradative pathway. Surprisingly, the number of caveolae at the plasma membrane increased after addition of albumin. This increase was blocked by cycloheximide treatment, indicating that albumin internalization also stimulates de novo protein synthesis, which is necessary for new caveolae formation. Together, our results show that during long-term albumin uptake, caveolin-1 travels to late endosomes and is replaced by newly synthesized caveolin-1 at the plasma membrane.18034788
In vitro and in vivo effects of potassium and magnesium on storage up to 7 days of apheresis platelet concentrates in platelet additive solution.
Diedrich B, Sandgren P, Jansson B, Gulliksson H, Svensson L, Shanwell A
Vox sanguinis
Prolonged storage of platelets up to 7 days provides improved availability, logistical management and decreased wastage. Beside methods of bacterial detection, addition of magnesium and potassium to the platelet storage solution (SSP+) may further improve the quality of platelets with extended storage.
Apheresis platelets from 10 donors were divided and stored in two different platelet additive solutions (PAS) (Intersol and SSP+) for a paired comparison. A variety of in vitro platelet function and metabolic assays were performed both on day 1 and after 7 days of storage. For in vivo study, platelets were labelled with either (111)Indium or (51)Chromium after 7 days of storage and were injected into the corresponding donor. Serial blood samples were drawn for recovery and survival measurements.
In vitro parameters for SSP+ showed significantly reduced glycolysis (lower glucose consumption and decreased production of lactate), a higher hypotonic shock response (HSR) and the extent of shape change reactivity and a lower degree of platelet activation by means of RANTES (regulated on activation, normal, T cell-expressed, and secreted), CD62p and CD63 expression. Platelet recovery on day 7 was higher for Intersol as compared to SSP+, 65 +/- 11 vs. 53 +/- 13% (P = 0.023), and survival showed no difference 4.2 +/- 1.9 vs. 3.6 +/- 1.4 days.
In vitro characteristics of platelets stored in PAS with addition of potassium and magnesium indicated higher quality, but this could not be verified by the in vivo parameters by means of recovery and survival.18034776
HIV-1 replication in dendritic cells occurs through a tetraspanin-containing compartment enriched in AP-3.
Garcia Eduardo, Nikolic Damjan S, Piguet Vincent
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Dendritic cells (DC) are crucial components of the early events of HIV infection. Dendritic cells capture and internalize HIV at mucosal surfaces and efficiently transfer the virus to CD4+ T cells in trans through infectious synapses (trans-infection pathway). Alternatively, HIV-1 replicates in DC (R5-HIV-1) (cis-infection pathway). Here, we analyzed HIV trafficking in DC during the trans-infection pathway as well as the cis-infection pathway. Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that after capture by DC, R5-HIV-1 and HIV-1 pseudotyped with vesicular stomatitis virus protein G colocalized in a viral compartment enriched in tetraspanins including CD81, CD82 and CD9, although at different levels, indicating a role of the viral envelope in targeting to the tetraspanin-rich compartment. Replication of R5-HIV-1 in DC (cis-infection pathway) also led to the accumulation, in an envelope-independent manner, of mature viral particles in a tetraspanin-rich compartment. A fraction of the HIV-1-containing compartments appeared directly accessible from the cell surface. In sharp contrast with the trans-infection pathway, the delta-subunit of the adaptor protein 3 (AP-3) complex was enriched on the HIV-1-containing compartment during R5-HIV-1 replication in DC (cis-infection pathway). Downregulation of AP-3 delta-adaptin reduced significantly viral particle release from HIV-1-infected DC. Together, these studies demonstrate a role for AP-3 in HIV replication in a tetraspanin-rich compartment in DC and contribute to the elucidation of the trafficking pathways required for DC-T cell transfer of HIV-1 infection, a critical step during the early events of HIV infection.18032515
Identification of host proteins associated with retroviral vector particles by proteomic analysis of highly purified vector preparations.
Segura María Mercedes, Garnier Alain, Di Falco Marcos Rafael, Whissell Gavin, Meneses-Acosta Angélica, Arcand Normand, Kamen Amine
Journal of virology
The Moloney murine leukemia virus (MMLV) belongs to the Retroviridae family of enveloped viruses, which is known to acquire minute amounts of host cellular proteins both on the surface and inside the virion. Despite the extensive use of retroviral vectors in experimental and clinical applications, the repertoire of host proteins incorporated into MMLV vector particles remains unexplored. We report here the identification of host proteins from highly purified retroviral vector preparations obtained by rate-zonal ultracentrifugation. Viral proteins were fractionated by one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, in-gel tryptic digested, and subjected to liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Immunogold electron microscopy studies confirmed the presence of several host membrane proteins exposed at the vector surface. These studies led to the identification of 27 host proteins on MMLV vector particles derived from 293 HEK cells, including 5 proteins previously described as part of wild-type MMLV. Nineteen host proteins identified corresponded to intracellular proteins. A total of eight host membrane proteins were identified, including cell adhesion proteins integrin beta1 (fibronectin receptor subunit beta) and HMFG-E8, tetraspanins CD81 and CD9, and late endosomal markers CD63 and Lamp-2. Identification of membrane proteins on the retroviral surface is particularly attractive, since they can serve as anchoring sites for the insertion of tags for targeting or purification purposes. The implications of our findings for retrovirus-mediated gene therapy are discussed.18024392
Synergistic growth-inhibitory effects of two tyrosine kinase inhibitors, dasatinib and PKC412, on neoplastic mast cells expressing the D816V-mutated oncogenic variant of KIT.
Gleixner Karoline V, Mayerhofer Matthias, Sonneck Karoline, Gruze Alexander, Samorapoompichit Puchit, Baumgartner Christian, Lee Francis Y, Aichberger Karl J, Manley Paul W, Fabbro Doriano, Pickl Winfried F, Sillaber Christian, Valent Peter
Haematologica
In a majority of all patients with systemic mastocytosis (SM) including those with mast cell leukemia (MCL), neoplastic mast cells (MC) display the D816V-mutated variant of KIT. The respective oncoprotein, KIT D816V, exhibits constitutive tyrosine kinase (TK) activity and has been implicated in malignant cell growth. Therefore, several attempts have been made to identify KIT D816V-targeting drugs.
We examined the effects of the novel TK-inhibitor dasatinib alone and in combination with other targeted drugs on growth of neoplastic MC.
Confirming previous studies, dasatinib was found to inhibit the TK activity of wild type (wt) KIT and KIT-D816V as well as growth and survival of neoplastic MC and of the MCL cell line, HMC-1. The growth-inhibitory effects of dasatinib in HMC-1 cells were found to be associated with a decrease in expression of CD2 and CD63. In addition, we found that dasatinib blocks KIT D816V-induced cluster-formation and viability in Ba/F3 cells. In drug combination experiments, dasatinib was found to co-operate with PKC412, AMN107, imatinib, and 2CdA in producing growth-inhibition and apoptosis in neoplastic MC. In HMC-1.1 cells lacking KIT D816V, all drug interactions were found to be synergistic in nature. By contrast, in HMC-1.2 cells exhibiting KIT D816V, only the combinations dasatinib+PKC412 and dasatinib+2CdA were found to produce synergistic effects.
Combinations of targeted drugs may represent an interesting pharmacologic approach for the treatment of aggressive SM or MCL.18005261
Honeybee venom secretory phospholipase A2 induces leukotriene production but not histamine release from human basophils.
Mustafa F B, Ng F S P, Nguyen T H, Lim L H K
Clinical and experimental immunology
The role of basophils in an anaphylactic response is well recognized but is usually masked by mast cells, which contain similar mediators for the induction of generalized vasodilatation and laryngeal constriction. The rapid onset of systemic anaphylactic symptoms, particularly in insect stings and ingested food, suggest that basophils, a circulating pool of cells containing histamine and other potent mediators such as leukotrienes, may be more involved in systemic anaphylaxis than originally thought. We wished to examine if secretory phospholipase A2, a systemic allergen found in honey bee venom (HBV-sPLA2) may activate basophils directly leading to rapid systemic mediator release. Basophils were isolated from human blood and stimulated with increasing concentrations of HBV-sPLA2. We found that physiological concentrations of HBV-sPLA2 induce rapid leukotriene C4 production from purified human basophils within 5 min, while interleukin (IL)-4 expression and production was induced at later time-points. Histamine release was not induced, signifying that HBV-sPLA2 did not induce generalized degranulation. Surface expression of CD63, CD69 and CD11b were up-regulated following HBV-sPLA2 treatment. Stimulation of basophils with anti-immunoglobulin E (IgE) following treatment with HBV-sPLA2 did not induce more leukotriene release. To investigate the mechanism of leukotriene production, 9-12 octadecadiynioc acid, a cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and 15-lipoxygenase inhibitor, was used and this abrogated leukotriene production. These results indicate that HBV-sPLA2 can directly activate human basophils in vitro to induce leukotriene production.18000614
Platelet tetraspanin complexes and their association with lipid rafts.
Israels Sara J, McMillan-Ward Eileen M
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Tetraspanins are a superfamily of integral membrane proteins that facilitate the organization of membrane and intracellular signaling molecules into dynamic signaling microdomains, tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs). Four tetraspanin family members have been identified in platelets: CD9, CD151 and TSSC6, which are constitutively associated with alphaIIbbeta3, and CD63, which is present on granule membranes in resting platelets and associates with alphaIIbbeta3-CD9 following platelet activation. CD63 and CD9 associate with a type II phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase, PI4K55, in both resting and activated platelets. Immunoelectron microscopic studies showed co-localization of CD63 and PI4K55 on internal membranes of resting platelets and on the filopodia of thrombin-activated platelets. Because TEMs in malignant cell lines appear to be distinct from prototypic lipid rafts, this study examined whether CD63-PI4K55 and CD9-PI4K55 complexes were resident in platelet-lipid rafts, or formed distinct microdomains. CD63, CD9 and PI4K55 were recovered from low-density membrane fractions (LDMFs) of sucrose gradients following platelet lysis in Brij 35, but unlike lipid-raft proteins were not insoluble in Triton X-100, being absent from LDMFs of platelets lysed with Triton. Incubation of platelets with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin, to deplete cholesterol and disrupt lipid rafts, shifted the complexes to higher density sucrose gradient fractions, but did not disrupt the tetraspanin-PI4K55 complexes. These results demonstrate that tetraspanin complexes in platelets form cholesterol-associated microdomains that are distinct from lipid rafts. It is probable that TEMs and lipid rafts associate under certain conditions, resulting in the close proximity of distinct sets of signaling molecules, facilitating signal transduction.17989173
Modulation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infectivity through incorporation of tetraspanin proteins.
Sato Kei, Aoki Jun, Misawa Naoko, Daikoku Eriko, Sano Kouichi, Tanaka Yuetsu, Koyanagi Yoshio
Journal of virology
Accumulating evidence indicates that human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) acquires various cellular membrane proteins in the lipid bilayer of the viral envelope membrane. Although some virion-incorporated cellular membrane proteins are known to potently affect HIV-1 infectivity, the virological functions of most virion-incorporated membrane proteins remain unclear. Among these host proteins, we found that CD63 was eliminated from the plasma membranes of HIV-1-producing T cells after activation, followed by a decrease in the amount of virion-incorporated CD63, and in contrast, an increase in the infectivity of the released virions. On the other hand, we found that CD63 at the cell surface was preferentially embedded on the membrane of released virions in an HIV-1 envelope protein (Env)-independent manner and that virion-incorporated CD63 had the potential to inhibit HIV-1 Env-mediated infection in a strain-specific manner at the postattachment entry step(s). In addition, these behaviors were commonly observed in other tetraspanin proteins, such as CD9, CD81, CD82, and CD231. However, L6 protein, whose topology is similar to that of tetraspanins but which does not belong to the tetraspanin superfamily, did not have the potential to prevent HIV-1 infection, despite its successful incorporation into the released particles. Taken together, these results suggest that tetraspanin proteins have the unique potential to modulate HIV-1 infectivity through incorporation into released HIV-1 particles, and our findings may provide a clue to undiscovered aspects of HIV-1 entry.17978651
Evidence for skeletal progenitor cells in the degenerate human intervertebral disc.
Risbud Makarand V, Guttapalli Asha, Tsai Tsung-Ting, Lee Joon Y, Danielson Keith G, Vaccaro Alexander R, Albert Todd J, Gazit Zulma, Gazit Dan, Shapiro Irving M
Spine
To identify and characterize endogenous progenitor cell population from intervertebral disc.
To determine if progenitor cells exist in degenerate human discs.
Back pain, a significant source of morbidity in our society, is directly linked to the pathology of the intervertebral disc. Because disc disease is accompanied by a loss of cellularity, there is considerable interest in regeneration of cells of both the anulus fibrosus (AF) and nucleus pulposus (NP).
To determine if skeletal progenitor cells are present in the disc, samples were obtained from the degenerate AF and NP of 5 patients (Thompson grade 2 and 3, mean age 34 +/- 7.6 years) undergoing anterior cervical discectomy and fusion procedures as well as adult rat lumbar spine.
Cells isolated from degenerate human tissues expressed CD105, CD166, CD63, CD49a, CD90, CD73, p75 low affinity nerve growth factor receptor, and CD133/1, proteins that are characteristic of marrow mesenchymal stem cells. In osteogenic media, there was an induction of alkaline phosphatase activity and expression of alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and Runx-2 mRNA. When maintained in adipogenic media, a small percentage of cells displayed evidence of adipogenic differentiation: accumulation of cytosolic lipid droplets and increased expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma2 and lipoprotein lipase mRNA. AF- and NP-derived cells also evidenced chondrogenic differentiation. CD133 (+) cells in the AF were able to commit to either the chondrogenic or adipogenic lineages. The results of the human disc studies were confirmed using cell derived from the NP and AF tissue of the mature rat disc.
The analytical data indicated that the pathologically degenerate human disc contained populations of skeletal progenitor cells. These findings suggest that these endogenous progenitors may be used to orchestrate the repair of the intervertebral disc.17976217
Effect of stress on basophil function in chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Dyke S M, Carey B S, Kaminski E R
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) is a distressing skin condition involving recurrent itchy hives lasting 6 weeks or longer. The mechanism involves mast cell and basophil degranulation, which releases inflammatory mediators including histamine. In our clinical practice, we have observed that the onset of CIU is often preceded by a major life event.
To investigate the role of the hormones of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in the link between psychological stress and CIU.
Thirty people with CIU and 30 normal controls were recruited. A flow cytometric CD63 expression assay was used to quantify basophil activation, and serum cortisol concentrations were measured as an indication of stress.
Both corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF) and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) were shown to activate basophils. There was no significant difference between numbers of CIU patients and normal controls responding to CFR, ACTH or cortisol. However, the responses in the CIU patients were stronger than those in normal controls. There was also a trend towards higher serum cortisol concentrations in CIU patients. The basophil response to CRF and ACTH correlated with the serum cortisol concentration in normal controls, but not in CIU patients.
Although our data have not supported the hypothesis that stress makes a major contribution to CIU, the heightened basophil response to CFR and ACTH and higher levels of serum cortisol do suggest a derangement of the HPA axis in CIU.17965585
Expression and function of transmembrane-4 superfamily (tetraspanin) proteins in osteoclasts: reciprocal roles of Tspan-5 and NET-6 during osteoclastogenesis.
Iwai Kaori, Ishii Masaru, Ohshima Shiro, Miyatake Kunio, Saeki Yukihiko
Allergology international : official journal of the Japanese Society of Allergology
Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing multinuclear polykaryons essential for bone remodeling, formed through cell fusion of mononuclear macrophage/monocyte lineage precursor cells upon stimulation by the RANK/RANKL system. Recent studies have revealed that a family of tetraspanin proteins, such as CD9, is critically involved in the cell fusion/polykaryon formation of these cell types. Until now, however, there is limited knowledge about the types of tetraspanins expressed in osteoclasts and their precursors.
The expression of different tetraspanin proteins in a monocyte/macrophage-lineage osteoclast precursor cell line, RAW264.7, was cyclopedically investigated using RT-PCR with specific primers and quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The function of two kinds of tetraspanins, Tspan-5 and NET-6, whose expression pattern was altered by RANKL stimulation, was examined by transfecting gene-specific short-interfering RNAs into these cell types.
Of the 17 tetraspanins in mammalian hematopoietic cells, RAW264.7 cells express mRNA for 12 different kinds of tetraspanins, namely, CD9, CD37, CD53, CD63, CD81, CD82, CD151, NAG-2, NET-6, SAS, Tspan-3, and Tspan-5. Interestingly, during their maturation into osteoclasts upon RANKL stimulation, the transcript for Tspan-5 is up-regulated, whereas that for NET-6 is down-regulated. Targeted inhibition of Tspan-5 by using gene-specific RNA interference suppressed RANKL-induced cell fusion during osteoclastogenesis, whereas inhibition of NET-6 augmented the osteoclastogenesis itself. These results suggest that Tspan-5 and NET-6 have a reciprocal function during osteoclastogenesis, i.e., positive and negative regulation by Tspan-5 and NET-6, respectively. RANKL regulates osteoclastogenesis by altering the balances of these tetraspanin proteins.
These data indicate that a diversity of tetraspanins is expressed in osteoclast precursors, and that cell fusion during osteoclastogenesis is regulated by cooperation of distinct tetraspanin family proteins such as Tspan-5 and NET-6. This study indicates that functional alterations of tetraspanin family proteins may have therapeutic potential in diseases where osteoclasts play a major role, such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis.17959629
RILP is required for the proper morphology and function of late endosomes.
Progida Cinzia, Malerød Lene, Stuffers Susanne, Brech Andreas, Bucci Cecilia, Stenmark Harald
Journal of cell science
Lysosomal degradation of signalling receptors such as the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) is an important mechanism for termination of cell signalling. Such degradation involves the endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated receptors into intralumenal vesicles (ILVs) of multivesicular endosomes (MVEs) that move along microtubules to fuse with perinuclear lysosomes. The Rab7-interacting lysosomal protein RILP is interesting in this context as it interacts with Vps22 (also known as EAP30) and Vps36 (also known as EAP45), subunits of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport II (ESCRT-II), as well as with the dynein-dynactin motor complex. Because previous functional studies of RILP have been based on its overexpression, we have asked here whether RILP is required for endocytic trafficking of receptors. Depletion of RILP caused elevated levels of four late-endosomal molecules, lyso-bisphosphatidic acid, Lamp1, CD63 and cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptors. Electron microscopy showed that endosomes of RILP-depleted cells were morphologically distinct from normal late endosomes and had a strongly reduced content of ILVs. As in Vps22-depleted cells, ligand-mediated degradation of EGFRs was strongly inhibited in RILP-depleted cells, in which endocytosed EGFRs were found to accumulate in early endosomes. By contrast, endocytosis and recycling of transferrin receptors occurred normally in RILP-depleted cells. These results establish that RILP, like the ESCRT proteins, is required for biogenesis of MVEs and degradative trafficking of EGFRs but not for trafficking of transferrin receptors through early endosomes. We propose that RILP might coordinate the biogenesis of MVEs with dynein-mediated motility.17957567
Gender-specific and menstrual cycle dependent differences in circulating microparticles.
Toth Bettina, Nikolajek Katharina, Rank Andreas, Nieuwland Rienk, Lohse Peter, Pihusch Verena, Friese Klaus, Thaler Christian J
Platelets
In comparison to age-matched men, young women are at increased risk to suffer from venous thromboembolism (VTE). Some risk factors of inherited and acquired thrombophilia are known, but approximately 30% of the overall risk remains unexplained. Recently, a role for microparticles (MP) in coagulation has been suggested. We investigated, if gender- and menstrual cycle-specific differences in circulating MP exist. Platelet- and endothelial cell-derived microparticles (PMP, EMP) and subpopulations thereof were evaluated flow-cytometrically in healthy women (n = 27) in different phases of their menstrual cycles (follicular phase: n = 14, luteal phase: n = 13) and in healthy men (n = 18). Additionally, D-dimer levels were determined. Compared to men, women had elevated numbers of annexin V-binding MP (p = 0.007), PMP (CD61; p = 0.013), P-selectin-exposing PMP (p = 0.002) and E-selectin-exposing EMP (p = 0.009). During the luteal phase, women had strongly elevated concentrations of MP, PMP, P-selectin- and CD63-exposing PMP as well as E-selectin-exposing EMP (p = 0.001, p < 0.001, p = 0.004, p = 0.003, and p < 0.001, respectively), and the ratio of P-selectin-exposing PMP/platelet increased more than three-fold as compared to men (p = 0.01). When different phases of the menstrual cycle were analysed, MP (annexin V; p = 0.025), PMP (CD61: p < 0.001; CD63: p = 0.015) and E-Selectin-positive EMP (p = 0.006) were all increased in the luteal phase. Although D-dimer concentrations in women were increased compared to men (p = 0 = 0.006), no menstrual cycle-specific differences were observed. In summary, circulating MP and subpopulations thereof are increased in women when compared to men, and this increase seems to be modulated by the menstrual cycle. Therefore, circulating MP may be an additional risk factor contributing to the hitherto unexplained procoagulatory state of young women.17949417
Different types of in vitro generated human monocyte-derived dendritic cells release exosomes with distinct phenotypes.
Johansson Sara M, Admyre Charlotte, Scheynius Annika, Gabrielsson Susanne
Immunology
Human in vitro generated dendritic cells and the exosomes they release are potential tools for the modulation of immune responses. Here, we characterized differently generated monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDCs) and their exosomes. Culturing of peripheral CD14+ cells from the same individuals with either interleukin (IL)-4 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (conventional MDDCs) or alternatively with IL-4 and IL-3 generated immature MDDCs in 7 days. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis showed that the IL-4/IL-3-generated MDDCs had significantly lower percentages of CD1a+, CD40+ and CD80+ cells and a higher percentage of CD86+ cells as compared with conventional MDDCs. In addition, IL-4/IL-3-generated MDDCs had significantly higher densities of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I [human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-ABC], MHC class II (HLA-DR), CD11c and the tetraspanin CD81 as compared with conventional MDDCs. In a comparison of their ability to stimulate CD8+ T cells, we found that the IL-4/IL-3 MDDCs were slightly more efficient than the conventional MDDCs at inducing interferon (IFN)-gamma release in response to viral peptides. Exosome morphology was confirmed by electron microscopy and exosome phenotypes were analysed by flow cytometry and western blot. In comparison to exosomes from conventional MDDCs, exosomes from IL-4/IL-3-generated MDDCs showed significantly stronger signals for HLA-ABC, HLA-DR, CD11c, CD63 and CD81. Thus, phenotypically the exosomes largely reflected their MDDCs of origin. When exosomes were loaded with viral peptides, both types of exosomes induced IFN-gamma release from CD8+ T cells. Our findings might have significance for the development of DC- and exosome-based therapies.17937679
Activation of granulocytes by direct interaction with dendritic cells.
Tsuda M, Inaba M, Sakaguchi Y, Fukui J, Ueda Y, Omae M, Ando Y, Mukaide H, Guo K, Yabuki T, Nakatani T, Ikehara S
Clinical and experimental immunology
Granulocytes from human peripheral blood were co-cultured with conventional dendritic cells (cDC) or plasmacytoid DCs (pDC) to examine the effects of DCs on the activation or function of granulocytes. After co-culture of granulocytes with DCs, expression of the activation markers of granulocytes (CD63 and CD64) was up-regulated, and increased expression of CD50, the activation marker and ligand for CD209 (DC-SIGN) was also observed. The interaction of granulocytes with DCs was visualized as the cluster where DCs, especially cDCs, were surrounded by granulocytes to form a 'rosette'. After co-culture of granulocytes with cDCs, the secretion of elastase from granulocytes was enhanced significantly when examined cytohistochemically and by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. An increase in myeloperoxidase (another activation index of granulocytes) was also observed after co-culture with DCs. These findings suggest the functional and phenotypical activation of granulocytes by interaction with DCs. Furthermore, we examined the involvement of adhesion molecules in the granulocyte-DC interaction, and found that CD209 participates to some extent in this interaction.17924962
Prospective isolation and characterization of mesenchymal stem cells from human placenta using a frizzled-9-specific monoclonal antibody.
Battula Venkata Lokesh, Treml Sabrina, Abele Harald, Bühring Hans-Jörg
Differentiation; research in biological diversity
We have recently shown that frizzled-9 (FZD9, CD349) is expressed on the cell surface of cultured mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) derived from the human bone marrow (BM) and chorionic placenta (PL). To study whether FZD9 is also a marker for naive mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), we analyzed the expression pattern of FZD9 on freshly isolated PL cells and determined the clonogenic potential of isolated FZD9(+) cells using the colony-forming units-fibroblastic (CFU-F) assay. About 0.2% of isolated PL cells were positive for FZD9. Two-color analysis revealed that FZD9(+) PL cells uniformly express CD9, CD63, and CD90, but are heterogeneous for CD10, CD13, and CD26 expression. In contrast to BM-derived MSC, PL-derived MSC expressed only low levels of CD271. Colony assays of sorted cells showed that clonogenic CFU-F reside exclusively in the FZD9(+) but not in the FZD9(-) fraction. Further analysis revealed that CFU-F were enriched by 60-fold in the FZD9(+)CD10(+)CD26(+) fraction but were absent in the FZD9(+)CD10(-)CD26(-) population. Cultured FZD9(+) cells expressed the embryonic stem cell makers Oct-4 and nanog as well as SSEA-4 and TRA1-2-49/6E. In addition, they could be differentiated into functional adipocytes and osteoblasts. This report describes for the first time that FZD9 is a novel and specific marker for the prospective isolation of MSC from human term PL.17912457
Tetraspanin CD9 is involved in the migration of retinal microvascular endothelial cells.
Deissler Heidrun, Kuhn Eva-Maria, Lang Gabriele E, Deissler Helmut
International journal of molecular medicine
Members of the tetraspanin protein family are modulators of several fundamental cellular processes in various cell types. However, expression and function of these proteins have not been studied in microvascular endothelial cells despite their (patho-)physiological importance. Western blotting, FACS or RT-PCR analyses confirmed that CD9 and other tetraspanins are expressed in immortalized microvascular endothelial cells of the bovine retina (iBREC). In subconfluent cultures, most of the detected CD9 was located intracellularly as well as in the plasma membrane at cell-cell contact sites and in long spike-like extensions, whereas cells in confluent cultures predominantly showed plasma membrane staining. In wound healing assays, CD9 delocalized from the plasma membrane to its intracellular compartment in cells located at the gap border, and the gap closure was retarded by the addition of an anti-CD9 antibody. Migration of iBREC towards fibronectin and their adhesion to fibronectin were also strongly inhibited in the presence of an anti-CD9 antibody whereas other anti-tetraspanin antibodies had no effect. In summary, iBREC express members of the tetraspanin family of which CD9 was demonstrated to have a function in migration and adhesion of these cells.17886062
Environmental polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) enhance allergic inflammation by acting on human basophils.
Schober Wolfgang, Lubitz Stefanie, Belloni Benedetta, Gebauer Gudrun, Lintelmann Jutta, Matuschek Georg, Weichenmeier Ingrid, Eberlein-König Bernadette, Buters Jeroen, Behrendt Heidrun
Inhalation toxicology
Diesel exhaust particles (DEPs) have been implicated in the worldwide increased incidence of allergic airway diseases over the past century. There is growing evidence that DEP-associated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) participate in the development and maintenance of immunoglobulin (Ig) E-mediated allergic diseases. To address this issue we investigated the impact of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) priority PAHs as well as of PAH-containing airborne extracts on antigen-induced CD63 upregulation and mediator release from human basophils. Whole blood samples from birch pollen allergic and control subjects were incubated in the presence of organic extracts of urban aerosol (AERex) or EPA-PAH standard with or without rBet v 1. Basophils were analyzed for CD63 expression as a measure of basophil activation by using multiparameter flow cytometry. In addition, purified basophils from birch pollen allergic donors were incubated for 2 h in the presence of 1 muM benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) or phenanthrene (Phe) and then stimulated with rBet v 1 for 45 min. Supernatants were assayed for histamine, interleukin (IL)-4, and IL-8 by means of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Basophils exposed in vitro simultaneously to AERex or EPA-PAH standard and rBet v 1 expressed CD63 significantly more than with antigen alone. PAHs synergized with rBet v 1 dose dependently, but did not activate basophils from nonallergic donors. BaP and Phe significantly enhanced cytokine secretion (IL-4, IL-8) and histamine release from purified basophils without antigen added, and secretion was not further enhanced by rBet v 1 stimulation. In conclusion, PAHs from roadside emissions can directly activate sensitized basophils to cytokine secretion and drive proallergic processes through enhanced Fcepsilon RI-coupled mediator release from human basophils.17904203
Inhibition of tyrosine kinase activity prevents the adhesive and cohesive properties of platelets and the expression of procoagulant activity in response to collagen.
Diaz-Ricart Maribel, Palomo Marta, Fuste Berta, Lopez-Vilchez Irene, Carbo Carla, Perez-Pujol Silvia, White James G, Escolar Gines
Thrombosis research
Platelet activation leads to signal transduction mechanisms, in which phosphotyrosine proteins play a relevant role.
Platelet suspensions were independently activated by collagen and thrombin in the absence and in the presence of two tyrosine kinase inhibitors, tyrphostin 47 and genistein. Samples were processed to visualize morphological changes by electron microscopy, to evaluate changes in cytoskeletal assembly, to analyze modifications in the expression of activation dependent antigens, and the procoagulant activity at the surface level by flow cytometry. Additional experiments applying flow conditions were performed to assess the effect of inhibiting tyrosine phosphorylation on primary platelet adhesion and fibrin formation.
Inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation blocked shape change and cytoskeletal assembly induced by collagen, and inhibited, though partially, those effects due to thrombin. Both activating agents induced the expression of the intraplatelet antigens CD62P and CD63 at the surface, although only collagen promoted expression of anionic phospholipids. Both tyrphostin 47 and genistein prevented those effects. The extent of platelet adhesion on both collagen-coated and subendothelial surfaces was significantly diminished by the presence of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors assayed. Fibrin formation was also significantly reduced.
Platelet shape change and secretion during platelet activation depends on tyrosine phosphorylation. In addition, primary adhesion of platelets induces signaling through tyrosine kinases to achieve full spreading, and results in the exposure of a procoagulant surface on platelets.17894858
Platelet-derived exosomes induce endothelial cell apoptosis through peroxynitrite generation: experimental evidence for a novel mechanism of septic vascular dysfunction.
Gambim Marcela Helena, do Carmo Alipio de Oliveira, Marti Luciana, Veríssimo-Filho Sidney, Lopes Lucia Rossetti, Janiszewski Mariano
Critical care (London, England)
Several studies link hematological dysfunction to severity of sepsis. Previously we showed that platelet-derived microparticles from septic patients induce vascular cell apoptosis through the NADPH oxidase-dependent release of superoxide. We sought to further characterize the microparticle-dependent vascular injury pathway.
During septic shock there is increased generation of thrombin, TNF-alpha and nitric oxide (NO). Human platelets were exposed for 1 hour to the NO donor diethylamine-NONOate (0.5 microM), lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 100 ng/ml), TNF-alpha (40 ng/ml), or thrombin (5 IU/ml). Microparticles were recovered through filtration and ultracentrifugation and analyzed by electron microscopy, flow cytometry or Western blotting for protein identification. Redox activity was characterized by lucigenin (5 microM) or coelenterazine (5 microM) luminescence and by 4,5-diaminofluorescein (10 mM) and 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein (10 mM) fluorescence. Endothelial cell apoptosis was detected by phosphatidylserine exposure and by measurement of caspase-3 activity with an enzyme-linked immunoassay.
Size, morphology, high exposure of the tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD81, together with low phosphatidylserine, showed that platelets exposed to NONOate and LPS, but not to TNF-alpha or thrombin, generate microparticles similar to those recovered from septic patients, and characterize them as exosomes. Luminescence and fluorescence studies, and the use of specific inhibitors, revealed concomitant superoxide and NO generation. Western blots showed the presence of NO synthase II (but not isoforms I or III) and of the NADPH oxidase subunits p22phox, protein disulfide isomerase and Nox. Endothelial cells exposed to the exosomes underwent apoptosis and caspase-3 activation, which were inhibited by NO synthase inhibitors or by a superoxide dismutase mimetic and totally blocked by urate (1 mM), suggesting a role for the peroxynitrite radical. None of these redox properties and proapoptotic effects was evident in microparticles recovered from platelets exposed to thrombin or TNF-alpha.
We showed that, in sepsis, NO and bacterial elements are responsible for type-specific platelet-derived exosome generation. Those exosomes have an active role in vascular signaling as redox-active particles that can induce endothelial cell caspase-3 activation and apoptosis by generating superoxide, NO and peroxynitrite. Thus, exosomes must be considered for further developments in understanding and treating vascular dysfunction in sepsis.17890860
Platelet activation during haemodialysis: comparison of cuprammonium rayon and polysulfone membranes.
Thijs Abel, Grooteman Muriel P C, Zweegman Sonja, Nubé Menso J, Huijgens Peter C, Stehouwer Coen D A
Blood purification
Haemodialysis-treated patients are at a high risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Part of this risk may be attributable to the type of the dialysis membrane used. We evaluated whether different dialysis membranes differ with respect to platelet activation.
In a randomized crossover trial, the platelet activation was measured in 14 patients treated with two different dialyzers (cuprammonium rayon membrane and polysulfone membrane). We compared the platelet activation over the dialyzer and between dialyzers after several weeks of dialysis.
There were no differences between the two dialyzers in platelet activation over the dialyzer. After 2 weeks, however, the expression of CD62P, CD63, and PAC-1 was statistically significantly lower after cuprammonium membrane treatment than after polysulfone membrane treatment (mean fluorescence intensity in arbitrary units 8.0 vs. 11.1, 2.64 vs. 4.01, and 5.61 vs. 9.74, respectively).
Dialysis with a polysulfone membrane seems to lead to more platelet activation than dialysis with a cuprammonium membrane.
2007 S. Karger AG, Basel17877745
Hyper-reactive PMNs in FcgammaRIIa 131 H/H genotype periodontitis patients.
Nicu E A, Van der Velden U, Everts V, Van Winkelhoff A J, Roos D, Loos B G
Journal of clinical periodontology
Receptors for the Fc part of IgG (FcgammaRIIa) on polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) mediate phagocytosis and cell activation. Previous results show that one of the genetic variants of the FcgammaRIIa, the 131 H/H, is associated with more periodontal breakdown than the R/R. This may be due to hyper-reactivity of the H/H-PMNs upon interaction with bacteria.
To study whether the FcgammaRIIa genotype modifies the PMN reactivity in periodontitis patients.
A cohort of 98 periodontitis patients was genotyped. From these, 10 H/H and 10 R/R consented to participate. PMNs were incubated with immune serum-opsonized Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans (A.a.). Phagocytosis, degranulation (CD63 and CD66b expression), respiratory burst and elastase release were assessed. Results: Patients of the H/H genotype showed more bone loss than those with the H/R or R/R genotype (p=0.038). H/H-PMNs phagocytosed more opsonized A.a. than did R/R-PMNs (p=0.019). The H/H-PMNs also expressed more CD63 and CD66b than did the R/R-PMNs (p=0.004 and 0.002, respectively) and released more elastase (p=0.001).
The genotyping results confirm previous reports that more periodontal destruction occurs in the H/H genotype than in the H/R or R/R genotype. The functional studies indicate a hyper-reactivity of the H/H-PMN in response to bacteria, which may be one of several pathways leading to more periodontal breakdown.17869981
Comparison of the effects of desflurane and sevoflurane on the expression of platelet surface glycoproteins in unstimulated and adenosine diphosphate-induced platelets in vitro.
Koroglu Ahmet, Cicek Muslum, Toprak Huseyin I, Karakoc Yunus, Noyan Funda, Ersoy Ozcan M
Journal of clinical anesthesia
To compare the effects of one minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) desflurane and sevoflurane on the expression of CD42b (glycoprotein [GP] Ib), CD41 (GPIIb), CD61 (GPIIIa), CD62P (P-selectin), and CD63 in both unstimulated and adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-stimulated platelets in vitro.
University laboratory.
15 healthy volunteers.
Platelet-rich plasma was obtained and divided into three groups: platelet-rich plasma exposed to air (group 1); air plus one MAC desflurane (6% vol; group 2), and air plus one MAC sevoflurane (2% vol; group 3), for 40 minutes. Percentage of antigen-positive cells (%(+)) mean channel fluorescence (MCF(Sigma)), and index of platelet activation for positive platelets (IPA(+)) as expression markers for GPIb, GPIIb, GPIIIa, P-selectin, and CD63, were measured.
In unstimulated platelets, expression markers for GPIIb and GPIIIa were significantly lower in groups 2 and 3 than group 1 (P < 0.001). P-selectin expression markers were significantly higher in group 2 than in group 1 or group 3 (P < 0.016). CD63 expression markers were significantly lower in group 3 than group 1 (P < 0.016). In ADP-stimulated platelets, expression markers for all glycoproteins were significantly higher in all groups.
Neither one MAC desflurane nor sevoflurane showed any significant change in ADP-stimulated platelets compared with the control group.17868401
Combined analysis of intracellular signalling and immunophenotype of human peripheral blood basophils by flow cytometry: a proof of concept.
Ebo D G, Dombrecht E J, Bridts C H, Aerts N E, de Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
The signal transduction pathways and control mechanisms involved in IgE-mediated basophil activation remain incompletely understood.
To investigate whether basophilic intracellular signal transduction and immunophenotype can be analysed simultaneously by flow cytometry.
Basophils in whole blood were stimulated with anti-IgE and latex antigen at various concentrations and during different time courses. Phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) as a representative of the intracellular signal transduction pathway and surface expression of CD63 was assessed simultaneously flow cytometrically. The effect of pre-incubation with IL-3 was assessed.
Stimulation of the basophils with anti-IgE and allergen induces a rapid phosphorylation of p38 MAPK that peaks between 1 and 5 min and returns to baseline levels after 60 min. In contrast, CD63 up-regulation demonstrates a maximal but more continuous expression that peaks approximately 5 min later than phosphorylation of p38 MAPK. Specific inhibition of p38 MAPK reduced or almost completely abrogated up-regulation of CD63. Pre-incubation of the basophils with IL-3 produces a rapid p38 MAPK phosphorylation over basal levels, but this was weaker and shorter than for anti-IgE stimulation. Pre-incubation of the basophils with IL-3 did not potentiate anti-IgE-induced phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and did affect spontaneous or IgE-mediated CD63 up-regulation.
This study provides the proof that the flow cytometer allows an integrated analysis of basophilic intracellular signalling and immunophenotyping. Owing to its technical simplicity, the low number of cells required and rapid analysis, the technique seems promising for use in the clinic as a diagnostic tool or to monitor therapy.
This study is the first to provide evidence for a combined analysis of basophilic intracellular signalling and immunophenotyping by flow cytometry. Owing to its technical simplicity, the low number of cells required and rapid analysis, the technique seems promising for use in the clinic as a diagnostic tool or to monitor therapy.17855546
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and influenza virus exit via different membrane microdomains.
Khurana Sandhya, Krementsov Dimitry N, de Parseval Aymeric, Elder John H, Foti Michelangelo, Thali Markus
Journal of virology
Directed release of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) into the cleft of the virological synapse that can form between infected and uninfected T cells, for example, in lymph nodes, is thought to contribute to the systemic spread of this virus. In contrast, influenza virus, which causes local infections, is shed into the airways of the respiratory tract from free surfaces of epithelial cells. We now demonstrate that such differential release of HIV-1 and influenza virus is paralleled, at the subcellular level, by viral assembly at different microsegments of the plasma membrane of HeLa cells. HIV-1, but not influenza virus, buds through microdomains containing the tetraspanins CD9 and CD63. Consequently, the anti-CD9 antibody K41, which redistributes its antigen and also other tetraspanins to cell-cell adhesion sites, interferes with HIV-1 but not with influenza virus release. Altogether, these data strongly suggest that the bimodal egress of these two pathogenic viruses, like their entry into target cells, is guided by specific sets of host cell proteins.17845393
Effects of cytapheresis on tumor necrosis factor receptor and on expression of CD63 in myeloperoxidase--antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody-associated vasculitis.
Hasegawa Midori, Nishii Chikako, Kabutan Nao, Kato Masao, Ohashi Atsushi, Nakai Shigeru, Murakami Kazutaka, Tomita Makoto, Nabeshima Kunihiro, Hiki Yoshiyuki, Oshima Hisaji, Sugiyama Satoshi
Therapeutic apheresis and dialysis : official peer-reviewed journal of the International Society for Apheresis, the Japanese Society for Apheresis, the Japanese Society for Dialysis Therapy
To evaluate the therapeutic potential of cytapheresis in myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (MPO-ANCA)-associated vasculitis, plasma levels of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors (sTNFR1, sTNFR2) and the expression of TNFR1, TNFR2, and CD63 on granulocytes were measured. The levels of sTNFR1 and sTNFR2, and the expression of TNFR1 and TNFR2 were significantly higher in MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis patients than in normal controls. The levels of sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 increased significantly after cytapheresis (P < 0.001). The expression of TNFR1 showed a tendency to decrease after cytapheresis (P = 0.0535). The expression of CD63 decreased significantly after cytapheresis (P < 0.05). Because sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 act as TNF-antagonists, the increases of sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 after cytapheresis might contribute to inhibit the action of TNF-alpha. The decreased expression of TNFR1, which mediates the signal for polymorphonuclear cell respiratory burst, might also contribute to the reduction of inflammation. From these results, the inhibition of TNF action and removal of degranulated granulocytes appear to be related to the mechanism whereby cytapheresis can exert a beneficial and therapeutic function in the treatment of MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis.17827389
Normal prion protein trafficking in cultured human erythroblasts.
Griffiths Rebecca E, Heesom Kate J, Anstee David J
Blood
Normal prion protein (PrP(c)), an essential substrate for development of prion disease, is widely distributed in hematopoietic cells. Recent evidence that variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease can be transmitted by transfusion of red cell preparations has highlighted the need for a greater understanding of the biology of PrP(c) in blood and blood-forming tissues. Here, we show that in contrast to another glycosylphosphoinositol-anchored protein CD59, PrP(c) at the cell surface of cultured human erythroblasts is rapidly internalized through the endosomal pathway, where it colocalizes with the tetraspanin CD63. In the plasma membrane, PrP(c) colocalizes with the tetraspanin CD81. Cross-linking with anti-PrP(c) or anti-CD81 causes clustering of PrP(c) and CD81, suggesting they can share the same microdomain. These data are consistent with a role for tetraspanin-enriched microdomains in trafficking of PrP(c). These results, when taken together with recent evidence that exosomes released from cells as a result of endosomal-mediated recycling to the plasma membrane contain prion infectivity, provide a pathway for the propagation of prion diseases.17806184
Clinico-biological characteristics of flow cytometry applied to hypersensitivity to NSAIDs.
Sainte-Laudy J, Touraine F, Boumediene A, Bonnaud F, Cogné M
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
17785549
A new diagnostic marker for secreted Epstein-Barr virus encoded LMP1 and BARF1 oncoproteins in the serum and saliva of patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Houali Karim, Wang Xiaohui, Shimizu Yuko, Djennaoui Djamel, Nicholls John, Fiorini Sylvie, Bouguermouh Abdelmadjid, Ooka Tadamasa
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research
EBV has been associated with nasopharyngeal carcinomas (NPC). In North Africa, the incidence is bimodal-the first peak occurring at approximately 20 years of age and the second peak occurring at approximately 50 years. Standard diagnostic tests based on immunofluorescence using anti-IgA EBV have shown that young North African patients have a negative serology compared with older patients. We are interested in two EBV-encoded oncoproteins, LMP1 and BARF1, which have thus far not been studied in terms of their potential as diagnostic markers for NPC. These two viral oncoproteins have been detected in cell culture media, so we tested whether they could be detected in the serum and saliva of patients with NPC.
LMP1 and BARF1 proteins were analyzed in the sera and saliva of young patients and adult patients with NPC from North Africa and China. We then examined whether the secreted proteins had biological activity by analyzing their mitogenic activity.
Both LMP1 and BARF1 were present in the serum and saliva from North African and Chinese patients with NPC. All young North African patients secreted both proteins, whereas 62% and 100% of adult patients secreted LMP1 and BARF1, respectively. From animal studies, the secreted LMP1 was associated with exosome-like vesicles. These secreted EBV oncoproteins showed a powerful mitogenic activity in B cells.
Both proteins will be a good diagnostic marker for NPC whereas BARF1 is a particularly promising marker for all ages of patients with NPC. Their mitogenic activity suggests their implication in the oncogenic development of NPC.17760879
The ESCRT machinery is not required for human cytomegalovirus envelopment.
Fraile-Ramos Alberto, Pelchen-Matthews Annegret, Risco Cristina, Rejas María T, Emery Vincent C, Hassan-Walker Aycan F, Esteban Mariano, Marsh Mark
Cellular microbiology
The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has been proposed to complete its final envelopment on cytoplasmic membranes prior to its release to the extracellular medium. The nature of these membranes and the mechanisms involved in virus envelopment and release are poorly understood. Here we show by immunogold-labelling and electron microscopy that CD63, a marker of multivesicular bodies (MVBs), is incorporated into the viral envelope, supporting the notion that HCMV uses endocytic membranes for its envelopment. We therefore investigated a possible role for the cellular endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery in HCMV envelopment. Depletion of tumour suppressor gene 101 and ALIX/AIP1 with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) in HCMV-infected cells did not affect virus production. In contrast, siRNAs against the vacuolar protein sorting 4 (VPS4) proteins silenced the expression of VPS4A and VPS4B, inhibited the sorting of epidermal growth factor to lysosomes, the formation of HIV Gag-derived virus-like particles and vesicular stomatitis virus infection, but enhanced the number of HCMV viral particles produced. Treatment of infected cells with protease inhibitors also increased viral production. These studies indicate that, in contrast to some enveloped RNA viruses, HCMV does not require the cellular ESCRT machinery to complete its envelopment.17714552
A novel antagonist of CRTH2 blocks eosinophil release from bone marrow, chemotaxis and respiratory burst.
Royer J F, Schratl P, Lorenz S, Kostenis E, Ulven T, Schuligoi R, Peskar B A, Heinemann A
Allergy
Chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 cells (CRTH2) has been revealed to be a novel receptor for prostaglandin (PG) D(2), which is a major mast cell product released during the allergic response. The aim of this study was to analyze the effects of a newly developed small molecule antagonist of CRTH2, Cay10471, on eosinophil function with respect to recruitment, respiratory burst and degranulation.
Chemotaxis of guinea pig bone marrow eosinophils and human peripheral blood eosinophils were determined using microBoyden chambers. Eosinophil release from bone marrow was investigated in the in situ perfused guinea pig hind limb preparation. Respiratory burst and degranulation were measured by flow cytometry.
Cay10471 bound with high affinity to recombinant human and guinea pig CRTH2, but not DP, receptors. The antagonist prevented the PGD(2)-induced release of eosinophils from guinea pig bone marrow, and inhibited the chemotaxis of guinea pig bone marrow eosinophils and human peripheral blood eosinophils. Pretreatment with PGD(2) primed eosinophils for chemotaxis towards eotaxin, and this effect was prevented by Cay10471. In contrast, PGD(2) inhibited the C5a-induced up-regulation of CD63, a cellular marker of degranulation, in a Cay10471-sensitive manner. Finally, Cay10471 abolished the respiratory burst of eosinophils upon stimulation by PGD(2).
These data further emphasize the importance of CRTH2 in eosinophil function and show that Cay10471 is a highly potent and selective antagonist of PGD(2)-induced eosinophil responses. Cay10471 might hence be a useful compound for the treatment of allergic diseases.17712993
Neutrophil activity in chronic granulomatous disease.
Pak Vladimir, Budikhina Anna, Pashenkov Mikhail, Pinegin Boris
Advances in experimental medicine and biology
The killing of microorganisms by neutrophils causes degranulation of azurophilic, specific, and gelatinase granules into the formed phagolysosomes. During the degranulation process, increased surface expression of CD63 (localized in the azurophilic granules of resting neutrophils) and CD66b/CD67 (from specific granules) can be detected. This results from the fusion of the granule membrane, containing these markers, with a plasma membrane. Release of granule content into the phagolysosomes or the extracellular environment occurs not only upon proper cell activation but also upon tissue injury. We compared expression of degranulation markers on neutrophils from chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) patients and healthy volunteers. Surface expression of CD63 in non-stimulated and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-stimulated neutrophils, bactericidal activity of serum, and alpha-defensins level (HNP 1-3) in plasma of CGD patients were significantly higher in comparison with healthy volunteers. At the same time, the levels of intracellular HNP 1-3 in CGD neutrophils were lower than in normal neutrophils. Thus, our data revealed augmented degranulation of azurophilic neutrophil granules in CGD, which might play a role in tissue destruction observed in this disease.17712045
Proteinase 3, the Wegener autoantigen, is externalized during neutrophil apoptosis: evidence for a functional association with phospholipid scramblase 1 and interference with macrophage phagocytosis.
Kantari Chahrazade, Pederzoli-Ribeil Magali, Amir-Moazami Omid, Gausson-Dorey Valérie, Moura Ivan Cruz, Lecomte Marie-Christine, Benhamou Marc, Witko-Sarsat Véronique
Blood
Proteinase 3 (PR3), a serine proteinase contained in neutrophil azurophilic granules, is considered a risk factor for vasculitides and rheumatoid arthritis when expressed on the outer leaflet of neutrophil plasma membrane and is the preferred target of antineutrophil cytoplasm autoantibodies (ANCA) in Wegener granulomatosis. ANCA binding to PR3 expressed at the surface of neutrophils activates them. Evidence is provided that neutrophil apoptosis induced significantly more membrane PR3 expression without degranulation (but no enhanced membrane CD35, CD66b, CD63, myeloperoxidase, or elastase expression). This observation was confirmed on cytoplasts, a model of granule-free neutrophils. We hypothesized that PR3 could interact with proteins involved in membrane flip-flop (eg, phospholipid scramblase 1 [PLSCR1]). PR3-PLSCR1 interaction in neutrophils was demonstrated by confocal microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation. In the RBL-2H3 rat mast-cell line stably transfected with PR3 or its inactive mutant (PR3S203A), PR3 externalization depended on PLSCR1, as shown by less PR3 externalization in the presence of rPLSCR1 siRNA, but independently of its serine-proteinase activity. Finally, apoptosis-externalized PR3 decreased the human macrophage-phagocytosis rate of apoptotic PR3 transfectants. Therefore, in addition to ANCA binding in vasculitis, the proinflammatory role of membrane PR3 expression may involve interference with macrophage clearance of apoptotic neutrophils.17708745
Determination of protein regions responsible for interactions of amelogenin with CD63 and LAMP1.
Zou YanMing, Wang HongJun, Shapiro Jason L, Okamoto Curtis T, Brookes Steven J, Lyngstadaas S Petter, Snead Malcolm L, Paine Michael L
The Biochemical journal
The enamel matrix protein amelogenin is secreted by ameloblasts into the extracellular space to guide the formation of highly ordered hydroxyapatite mineral crystallites, and, subsequently, is almost completely removed during mineral maturation. Amelogenin interacts with the transmembrane proteins CD63 and LAMP (lysosome-associated membrane protein) 1, which are involved in endocytosis. Exogenously added amelogenin has been observed to move rapidly into CD63/LAMP1-positive vesicles in cultured cells. In the present study, we demonstrate the protein region defined by amino acid residues 103-205 for CD63 interacts not only with amelogenin, but also with other enamel matrix proteins (ameloblastin and enamelin). A detailed characterization of binding regions in amelogenin, CD63 and LAMP1 reveals that the amelogenin region defined by residues PLSPILPELPLEAW is responsible for the interaction with CD63 through residues 165-205, with LAMP1 through residues 226-251, and with the related LAMP2 protein through residues 227-259. We predict that the amelogenin binding region is: (i) hydrophobic; (ii) largely disordered; and (iii) accessible to the external environment. In contrast, the binding region of CD63 is likely to be organized in a '7' shape within the mushroom-like structure of CD63 EC2 (extracellular domain 2). In vivo, the protein interactions between the secreted enamel matrix proteins with the membrane-bound proteins are likely to occur at the specialized secretory surfaces of ameloblast cells called Tomes' processes. Such protein-protein interactions may be required to establish short-term order of the forming matrix and/or to mediate feedback signals to the transcriptional machinery of ameloblasts and/or to remove matrix protein debris during enamel biomineralization.17698921
Differential targeting of secretory lysosomes and recycling endosomes in mast cells revealed by patterned antigen arrays.
Wu Min, Baumgart Tobias, Hammond Stephanie, Holowka David, Baird Barbara
Journal of cell science
Polarized response towards a contact interface is a common theme in intercellular signaling. To visualize spatial regulation of stimulated secretion within a contact region, we exposed IgE-sensitized rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) mast cells to a surface that was patterned on the microm scale with hapten-containing lipid bilayers to activate cell surface IgE-receptor complexes. We find that, within 10 minutes of stimulation, fusion of individual secretory lysosomes is targeted towards the cell-substrate interface, but is spatially segregated from the patterned bilayers and receptor signaling complexes. By contrast, stimulated outward trafficking of recycling endosomes is preferentially targeted towards the patterned bilayers. High spatial resolution of both antigen presentation in these arrays and detection of exocytotic events provides direct evidence for the heterogeneity of polarized responses.17671435
Asymmetric cell divisions of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells meet endosomes.
Giebel Bernd, Beckmann Julia
Cell cycle (Georgetown, Tex.)
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) are undifferentiated cells, which self-renew over a long period of time and give rise to committed hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) containing the capability to replenish the whole blood system. Since both uncontrolled expansion as well as loss of HSC would be fatal, the decision of self-renewal versus differentiation needs to be tightly controlled. There is good evidence that both HSC niches as well as asymmetric cell divisions are involved in controlling whether HSC self-renew or become committed to differentiate. In this context, we recently identified four proteins which frequently segregate asymmetrically in dividing HSC/HPC. Remarkably, three of these proteins, the tetraspanins CD53 and CD63, and the transferrin receptor are endosome-associated proteins. Here, we highlight these observations in conjunction with recent findings in model organisms which show that components of the endosomal machinery are involved in cell-fate specification processes.17659434
Use of both CD63 up regulation and IgE down regulation for the flow cytometric analysis of allergen induced basophil activation. Definition of an activation index.
Sainte-Laudy J, Boumediene A, Touraine F, Orsel I, Brianchon C, Bonnaud F, Cogné M
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
The aim of this study was to compare the use of a late (CD63) and an early (IgE) marker of basophil activation in the flow cytometric diagnosis of beta-lactam induced allergic hypersensitivity reactions.
Twelve patients who had had a clear cut betalactam induced immediate reaction and 16 controls were selected, as well as 11 patients who had had an immediate reaction to bee or wasp stings.
Leukocyte suspensions were incubated with allergen dilutions as well as 2 positive controls (anti-IgE and NFormyl- Methionyl-Leucyl-Phenylalanine (fMLP)). Basophils were labelled with an anti-IgE FITC (fluorescein isothiocyanate) and an anti-CD63 PE (phycoerythrin). Results were expressed as percentage CD63 expression and index calculated according to a specific algorithm including the two activation markers.
Significant CD63 expression (>5 %) was observed in 3/12 cases for the beta-lactam sensitized population, in 0/16 cases for the controls and in 11/11 cases for the venom sensitized population. A significant index (determined by a ROC analysis) was observed in 11/12 beta-lactam sensitized patients and in 0/16 controls.
These results show that IgE (an early activation marker) is more sensitive than CD63 (a later activation marker) in the diagnosis of beta-lactam allergy.17651099
Myocardial functional and textural findings of the right and left ventricles and their association with cellular adhesion molecules in Behçet's disease.
Yildirim Nesligul, Tekin Nilgun Solak, Tekin Ishak Ozel, Dogan Sait, Aydin Mustafa, Gursurer Metin, Dursun Aydin, Bozboga Seher
Echocardiography (Mount Kisco, N.Y.)
This study was designed to assess whether ultrasonic reflectivity, evaluated by integrated backscatter analysis was associated with the severity of inflammation and diastolic dysfunction of the left (LV) and right ventricles (RV) in Behçet's disease (BD).
The study consisted of 20 patients with BD and 18 healthy controls. The expression of CD11b and CD63 on the surface of granulocytes and monocytes were measured by flow cytometry. RV and LV diastolic functions were assessed by tricuspid and mitral annular tissue Doppler recordings, respectively. Backscatter cyclic variation (CV) and maximal intensity (IB) were measured in RV lateral wall, interventricular septum, and posterior LV wall from parasternal long-axis view, apex from apical four-chamber view, anterior, inferior, and lateral LV walls from parasternal short axis view.
The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of CD11b on granulocytes and CD63 on monocytes in BD patients was higher than those of controls. Patients with BD had smaller mitral and tricuspid annular early diastolic wave velocities and early/late diastolic wave velocity ratios (E/A) than controls. MFI of CD11b and CD63 was inversely correlated with tricuspid and mitral annular E/A in BD patients. CV of RV and global CV of LV were found to be diminished in BD patients than controls. CV of RV and global CV of LV showed a direct correlation with tricuspid and mitral annular E/A ratio, respectively.
There is an association between the levels of cellular adhesion molecules, deterioration of diastolic function, and altered myocardial ultrasonic reflectivity in BD.17641064
Exosomes with immune modulatory features are present in human breast milk.
Admyre Charlotte, Johansson Sara M, Qazi Khaleda Rahman, Filén Jan-Jonas, Lahesmaa Riitta, Norman Mikael, Neve Etienne P A, Scheynius Annika, Gabrielsson Susanne
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Breast milk is a complex liquid with immune-competent cells and soluble proteins that provide immunity to the infant and affect the maturation of the infant's immune system. Exosomes are nanovesicles (30-100 nm) with an endosome-derived limiting membrane secreted by a diverse range of cell types. Because exosomes carry immunorelevant structures, they are suggested to participate in directing the immune response. We hypothesized that human breast milk contain exosomes, which may be important for the development of the infant's immune system. We isolated vesicles from the human colostrum and mature breast milk by ultracentrifugations and/or immuno-isolation on paramagnetic beads. We found that the vesicles displayed a typical exosome-like size and morphology as analyzed by electron microscopy. Furthermore, they floated at a density between 1.10 and 1.18 g/ml in a sucrose gradient, corresponding to the known density of exosomes. In addition, MHC classes I and II, CD63, CD81, and CD86 were detected on the vesicles by flow cytometry. Western blot and mass spectrometry further confirmed the presence of several exosome-associated molecules. Functional analysis revealed that the vesicle preparation inhibited anti-CD3-induced IL-2 and IFN-gamma production from allogeneic and autologous PBMC. In addition, an increased number of Foxp3(+)CD4(+)CD25(+) T regulatory cells were observed in PBMC incubated with milk vesicle preparations. We conclude that human breast milk contains exosomes with the capacity to influence immune responses.17624239
Interleukin-3 promotes the expression of E-NPP3/CD203C on human blood basophils in healthy subjects and in patients with birch pollen allergy.
Hauswirth A W, Sonneck K, Florian S, Krauth M T, Bohm A, Sperr W R, Valenta R, Schernthaner G H, Printz D, Fritsch G, Buhring H J, Valent P
International journal of immunopathology and pharmacology
We recently identified the ectoenzyme CD203c as a novel basophil activation antigen that is upregulated in response to FcepsilonRI cross-linkage. We investigated the effects of various interleukins (ILs) on expression of CD203c on blood basophils using an antibody against CD203c and flow cytometry. Of all cytokines tested, only IL-3 was found to upregulate expression of CD203c on basophils above baseline levels. The effects of IL-3 were dose- and time-dependent (EC(50): 0.1-1 ng/ml) without differences observed between healthy and allergic donors. Whereas anti-IgE induced maximum upregulation of CD203c within 15 minutes, the IL-3-induced upregulation showed a maximum after 180 minutes. IgE-receptor cross-linking resulted in enhanced expression of both CD63 and CD203c, whereas IL-3 enhanced the levels of CD203c without promoting expression of CD63. The IL-3-induced upregulation of CD203c was also observed in highly enriched basophils and was counteracted by a blocking antibody against the alpha chain of the IL-3 receptor (CD123). The IL-3-induced upregulation of CD203c was also found to depend on the presence of calcium. To analyze signaling pathways involved in IL-3-induced upregulation of CD203c, pharmacologic inhibitors were applied. The PI3-kinase inhibitors, wortmannin and LY294002 counteracted the IL-3-induced expression of CD203c, whereas MEK- and PKC inhibitors showed no effects. In conclusion, IL-3 upregulates expression of CD203c on basophils through a specific receptor and via a PI3-kinase-dependent signaling-pathway. Compared to FcepsilonRI-mediated cell activation, IL-3-induced upregulation of CD203c is a late(r) event and is not accompanied by upregulation of CD63.17624082
Expression and significance of the protein and mRNA of metastasis suppressor gene ME491/CD63 and integrin alpha5 in ovarian cancer tissues.
Zhijun X, Shulan Z, Zhuo Z
European journal of gynaecological oncology
To investigate the expression and significance of the proteins and mRNA of metastasis suppressor gene Me491/cd63 and integrin alpha5 in ovarian cancer tissues.
RT-PCR and in situ hybridization were used to detect the expression of the proteins and mRNA of ME491/CD63 and integrin alpha5 in normal ovarian tissues (Group I), ovarian benign tumor tissues (Group II), ovarian borderline tumor tissues (Group III) and ovarian cancer tissues (Group IV), and the correlation between the expression and the age of patient, degree of differentiation, lymphatic metastasis, stage and pathological type was analyzed.
There was a significant change in gene expression between the well and moderately differentiated tumors and poorly differentiated tumors. Gene expression in Groups III and IV was significantly weak, and significantly different from that in Group II and the early-stages of Groups III and IV. There was a significant difference in gene expression between each group.
There is low expression of the proteins and mRNA of ME491/CD63 and integrin alpha5 in ovarian cancer. The lower the pathological differentiation is, the more significant the loss of expression is and the more likely metastasis is.17620828
Basophil-activation tests in Hymenoptera allergy.
Dubois Anthony E J, van der Heide Sicco
Current opinion in allergy and clinical immunology
Despite recent advances in our understanding of basophil biology and discovery of new markers for basophil activation, tests measuring basophil activation are not widely utilized in Hymenoptera allergy. Studies of the basophil-activation test in Hymenoptera allergy were examined and the clinical utility of this test was assessed.
It has been demonstrated that the results of basophil-activation tests correlate quite well with those of serum IgE testing or skin-prick tests. Many studies compare test outcomes with history in patients and nonallergic controls, so that specificity in sensitized but clinically nonreactive individuals remains unknown. Although one study showed that the basophil-activation test might predict immunotherapy side effects, this could not be confirmed in a second study, and no role has been established for the basophil-activation test in the monitoring of venom immunotherapy. The basophil-activation test has no extra value in assessing sting challenges, although experience is limited.
The measurement of basophil-activation markers may be useful in detecting IgE-mediated sensitization but the relevance for application of the basophil-activation test in prediction of clinical reactivity in Hymenoptera allergy is very limited. For this reason, this test currently has no established role in the diagnosis and management of patients with insect sting allergy.17613995
Replication of HIV-1 in vivo and in vitro.
Orenstein Jan Marc
Ultrastructural pathology
A complex relationship exists between HIV and its cellular targets. The lethal effect of HIV on circulating CD4(+) helper T lymphocytes parallels the degree of the infected individual's immunodeficiency and ultimately the transition to AIDS and death. However, as with other members of the Lentivirus family of retroviruses, the ubiquitous, mobile macrophage is also a prime target for HIV infection, and apparently, in most instances, is the initial infected cell, since most people are infected with a CCR5 chemokine-tropic virus. Unlike the lymphocyte, the macrophage is apparently a more stable viral host, capable of a long infected life as an HIV reservoir and a chronic source of infectious virus. Published in vitro studies have indicated that whereas lymphocytes replicate HIV solely on their plasma membrane, macrophages have been envisaged to predominantly replicate HIV within cytoplasmic vacuoles, and thus have been likened to a "Trojan horse," when it comes to the immune system. Recent studies have revealed an ingenious way by which the cultured monocyte-derived macrophage (MDM) replicates HIV and releases it into the medium. The key macrophage organelle appears to be what is alternatively referred to as the "late endosome" (LE) or the "multivesicular body" (MVB), which have a short and a long history, respectively. Proof of the association is that chemically, LE/MVB and their vesicles possess several pathopneumonic membrane markers (e.g., CD63) that are found on released HIV particles. The hypothesis is that HIV usurps this vesicle-forming mechanism and employs it for its own replication. Release of the intravacuolar virus from the cell is hypothesized to occur by a process referred to as exocytosis, resulting from the fusion of virus-laden LE/MVB with the plasma membrane of the macrophage. Interestingly, LE/MVB are also involved in the infection stage of MDM by HIV. Close review of the literature reveals that along with the Golgi, which contributes to the formation of LE/MVB, the MVB was first identified as a site of HIV replication by macrophages many years ago, but the full implication of this observation was not appreciated at the time. As in many other areas of HIV research, what has been totally lacking is an in vivo confirmation of the in vitro phenomenon. Herein, the ultrastructure of HIV interaction with cells in vitro and in vivo is explored. It is shown that while HIV is regularly found in LE/MVB in vitro, it is infrequently the case in vivo. Therefore, the results challenge the "Trojan horse" concept.17604950
CXCR1/2 ligands induce p38 MAPK-dependent translocation and release of opioid peptides from primary granules in vitro and in vivo.
Rittner Heike L, Labuz Dominika, Richter Jan F, Brack Alexander, Schäfer Michael, Stein Christoph, Mousa Shaaban A
Brain, behavior, and immunity
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) can release opioid peptides which bind to opioid receptors on sensory neurons and inhibit inflammatory pain. This release can be triggered by chemokine receptor 1/2 (CXCR1/2) ligands. Our aim was to identify the granule subpopulation containing opioid peptides and to assess whether MAPK mediate the CXCR1/2 ligand-induced release of these peptides. Using double immunofluorescence confocal microscopy, we showed that beta-endorphin (END) and Met-enkephalin (ENK) were colocalized with the primary (azurophil) granule markers CD63 and myeloperoxidase (MPO) within PMN. END and ENK release triggered by a CXCR1/2 ligand in vitro was dependent on the presence of cytochalasin B (CyB) and on p38 MAPK, but not on p42/44 MAPK. In addition, translocation of END and ENK containing primary granules to submembranous regions of the cell was abolished by the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580. In vivo CXCL2/3 reduced pain in rats with complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-induced hindpaw inflammation. This effect was attenuated by intraplantar (i.pl.) antibodies against END and ENK and by i.pl. p38 MAPK inhibitor treatment. Taken together, these findings indicate that END and ENK are contained in primary granules of PMN, and that CXCR1/2 ligands induce p38-dependent translocation and release of these opioid peptides to inhibit inflammatory pain.17601634
Cholesterol regulates prostasome release from secretory lysosomes in PC-3 human prostate cancer cells.
Llorente Alicia, van Deurs Bo, Sandvig Kirsten
European journal of cell biology
Prostasomes are vesicles secreted by epithelial cells of the prostate gland. However, little is known about the mechanism and the regulation of prostasome secretion. Since endocytic organelles may be involved in prostasome release, PC-3-derived prostasomes were investigated by Western blot analysis for the presence of marker proteins normally associated with these organelles. Prostasomes secreted by PC-3 cells contain clathrin, Tsg101, Hrs, Rab11, Rab5, LAMP-1, LAMP-2, LAMP-3/CD63, and annexin II. Moreover, electron microscopy of PC-3 cells revealed the presence of characteristic multivesicular body-like secretory lysosomes containing vesicles with the same size-distribution as released prostasomes. Ultrastructural immunogold labelling showed that LAMP-1, LAMP-2 and LAMP-3/CD63 were associated with these vesicles. In addition, we have investigated whether cholesterol plays a role in prostasome release by the human prostate cancer cell line PC-3. Interestingly, prostasome release was significantly increased when the cholesterol levels of PC-3 cells were reduced by the cholesterol-sequestering agent methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MBCD), or by treatment with lovastatin and mevalonate. In conclusion, these studies indicate that cholesterol plays an important role in the release of prostasomes by the human prostate cancer PC-3 cells, and suggest that prostasomes may be released after fusion of secretory lysosomes with the plasma membrane.17583110
Exotic food allergy: anaphylactic reaction to lychee.
Raap U, Schaefer T, Kapp A, Wedi B
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
There are very few reports on allergic reactions to lychee fruit in the literature. We describe the case of a 26-year-old man who developed pruritus, generalized urticaria, and severe angioedema of his lips and tongue with dyspnea within 15 minutes after lychee fruit intake. Although we found no lychee-specific immunoglobulin E antibodies, a basophil activation test (BAT) and a cellular antigen stimulation test (CAST) to lychee were both positive, as was a prick-to-prick test with fresh lychee fruit. The patient also suffered from an oral food allergy syndrome to parsley and was sensitized to mugwort but not to latex or profilin. BAT and CAST are helpful tools in the diagnostic workup for exotic food allergy. Mugwort is suggested as the allergen responsible for,the cross-reactivity presented by this patient, as he had no sensitization to latex or profilin.17582478
Expression of activation markers on basophils in a controlled model of anaphylaxis: General, methodologic, and clinical issues.
Ebo Didier G, Bridts Chris H, Dombrecht Evelyne, De Clerck Luc S, Stevens Wim J
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
17579280
Clinical and laboratory examinations in the subgroups of chronic urticaria.
Irinyi Beatrix, Széles György, Gyimesi Edit, Tumpek Judit, Herédi Emese, Dimitrios Georgitsis, Adány Róza, Hunyadi János, Szegedi Andrea
International archives of allergy and immunology
The aetiology of chronic urticaria is heterogeneous. Physical urticaria (PU) is estimated at around 35%, autoimmune urticaria (AIU) at 25% and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) at 35% of all chronic urticaria cases.
Differences in clinical and laboratory parameters among AIU, PU and CIU groups were examined. AIU was diagnosed if the basophil CD63 assay was positive. Demographic data, severity of symptoms and association with allergic and autoimmune diseases were analysed by the aid of a questionnaire. Immunoassays were carried out and the effectiveness of therapy was also investigated.
Concerning the urticaria score, AIU patients had significantly higher total urticaria scores than patients with CIU (p = 0.013), dermatographic urticaria (p = 0.05) or cholinergic urticaria (p = 0.038). Between CIU and dermatographic urticaria and between CIU and cholinergic urticaria patients, we found insignificant differences in the urticaria score (p = 0.707 and p = 0.336, respectively). AIU was more frequently associated with autoimmune diseases in the personal history (p < 0.001) and with other types of urticaria in the family history (p < 0.001). Also, anti-thyroid antibodies were more frequently detected in the AIU group. Antihistamine therapy was less effective in the AIU group (12.8%) than in the PU (70.3%) and CIU groups (68.6%), but there were no significant differences between the CIU and PU groups regarding the effectiveness of antihistamine therapy.
The autoimmune subgroup represents the most severe form of chronic urticaria. On the other hand, there were no significant differences between the CIU and PU groups neither in urticaria scores nor in response to antihistamine therapy.
2007 S. Karger AG, Basel21118649
[Levels of activation markers of platelets in peripheral blood and their significance in patients with lung cancer].
Zhang Yong, Duan Lincan, Xiang Xudong, Huang Yunchao, Qian Kebao, Jiang Yongxin, Wang Kun
Zhongguo fei ai za zhi = Chinese journal of lung cancer
Platelet activation often occurs in intermediate and advanced tumors, with increases of expression and release of platelet adhesion molecule. The aim of this study is to investigate the expression of activation markers of platelet and their significance in lung cancer.
The activation markers of platelet, CD62P and CD63, were detected in peripheral blood of 120 patients with lung cancer and 60 healthy persons by FCM method.
The levels of peripheral blood CD62P and CD63 of lung cancer patients were significantly higher than those of healthy people (P < 0.01). In lung cancer group, the levels of peripheral blood CD62P and CD63 on the seventh postoperative day were significantly lower than those before operation and on the first postoperative day (P < 0.01). The levels of peripheral blood CD62P and CD63 before operation were closely related to size of tumor, lymph node status and TNM stages (P < 0.01), but not to cell differentiation, histology, age and sex of lung cancer patients (P > 0.05).
Activation markers of platelet obviously increase in peripheral blood of lung cancer patients and they may play important roles in tumor growth and lymphatic metastasis. The levels of activation markers of platelet may be useful predictors for prognosis.17565850
[Cytotoxicity of dendritic cells pulsed by CpG ODN on ovarian carcinoma cells: in vitro experiment with ovarian carcinoma cells].
Ye Ming-Zhu, Li He-Lian, Han Li-Ying
Zhonghua yi xue za zhi
To investigate the effect of dendritic cells (DCs) pulsed by oligonucleotide containing "un-methylated cytimidine-phosphodiester bond-guanylic acid" motif (CpG ODN) on ovarian carcinoma cells.
Dendritic cells were isolated form the peripheral monocytes and co-incubated with synthesized CpG2006, CAI125, important epithelial ovarian cancer-associated antigen, or CpG ODN + CA125 for 72 h. Flow cytometry (FC) was used to detect the expression of CD(1alpha), CD(63), CD(86), and human leucocyte antigen-DR (HLA-DR) on the cell surface. ELISA was used to detect the IL-12 level in the supernatant. T cells were obtained from the DCs. The suspensions of different groups of pulsed DCs were co-incubated with T cells. Mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) was used to detect the proliferating activity of the T cells. Ovarian carcinoma cells of the line OVCAR-3 were added into the culture fluid of T cells with different effector-target ratios, and then unpulsed DCs, CpG ODN-pulsed DCs, CpG ODN + CA125-pulsed DCs, and CA125-pulsed DCs were added respectively. MTT colorimetry was performed to measure the A values of different wells so as to calculate the killing rate.
(1) The expression levels of CD(63), CD(86), and HLA-DR on the membranes of the CpG ODN-pulsed DCs and CpG ODN + C125-pulsed DCs were significantly higher than those of the un-pulsed DCs (all P < 0.01), however, there were no significant differences in the expression of CD(1alpha) among different groups (all P > 0.05). (2) The IL-12 levels in the supernatants of the CpG ODN-pulsed DCs and CpG ODN + C125-pulsed DCs were significantly higher than those of the unpulsed and CA125-pulsed groups (all P < 0.01). (3) MLR showed that the T cell proliferation rates of the T cells sensitized by the CpG ODN-pulsed DCs and CpG ODN + C125-pulsed DCs were both higher than those of the T cells stimulated by the unpulsed and CA125-pulsed groups when the effector: target ratio was 10:1 (all P < 0.01). (4) The killing rates on OVCAR-3 cells of the CTLs sensitized by CpG ODN + CA125-pulsed DCs at the same effector: target ratios were all higher than those of the CTLs sensitized by the CpG ODN-pulsed DCs, CA125-pulsed DCs, and unpulsed DCs (all P < 0.01), the killing activity of the cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) sensitized by CpG ODN+CA125-pulsed DCs on the OVCAR-3 cells was shown even when the effector: target ratio was as low as 10:1, and then increased along with the increase of the effector: target ratio to the height of 64.9%.
Capable of inducing immune cytotoxicity on ovarian carcinoma, DCs sensitized by CpG ODN + CA125 may have a great implication on clinical application.17565278
Tetraspan proteins: regulators of renal structure and function.
Caplan Michael J, Kamsteeg Erik-Jan, Duffield Amy
Current opinion in nephrology and hypertension
Members of the tetraspan family are widely expressed and poorly understood. An emerging literature suggests that through their interactions with other membrane proteins they play central or regulatory roles in a wide variety of physiological processes. This review will discuss selected tetraspan complexes and highlight their relevance to epithelial cells and the kidney.
Tetraspans regulate the signaling and trafficking properties of their partner proteins. Tetraspan complexes with integrin molecules, for example, modulate cell adhesion and mobility. Perturbations of tetraspan-integrin assemblies can have dramatic impacts on renal tissue morphogenesis, resulting in a disruption of normal glomerular architecture and selectivity. Tetraspan interactions with renal ion transport proteins appear to affect transporter function by enhancing or inhibiting the endocytic internalization of their transport protein partners.
Tetraspans constitute a novel class of proteins whose capacity to alter the cell biological and functional properties of their membrane protein partners is likely to have wide ranging and important physiological ramifications.17549300
Hyperresponsiveness of platelets in ischemic stroke.
Fateh-Moghadam Suzanne, Htun Patrik, Tomandl Bernd, Sander Dirk, Stellos Konstantinos, Geisler Tobias, Langer Harald, Walton Kodwo, Handschu Rene, Garlichs Christoph, Daniel Werner G, Gawaz Meinrad
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Platelet activation and aggregation are critical in the pathogenesis of acute ischemic cerebrovascular diseases. The aim of our study was to characterize platelet function in patients with acute ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA), and to evaluate the effect of platelet activation on clinical outcome. One hundred thirty-eight consecutive patients with TIA (n = 74) or stroke (n = 64) were enrolled in this study. Platelet aggregation in response to ADP, epinephrine, arachidonic acid, or collagen, and expression of platelet activation receptors (CD62P, CD63, LIBS-1 and PAC-1) in the acute phase and at three months follow-up were evaluated. Platelets derived from stroke patients were more hyperaggregable in response to agonists in the acute phase compared to TIA patients (p[ADP] = 0.002, p[arachidonic acid] = 0.047, p[epinephrine] = 0.020). Platelet activation was enhanced in the acute phase irrespective of the severity of the disease (stroke or TIA) and returned to baseline levels three months later. Persistent elevated platelet activation at three months follow-up (PAC-1) was associated with increased incidence of recurrent stroke (median, [interquartile range] 3.4, [3.0-5.2] versus 2.9, [2.3-4.0], p = 0.048). In conclusion, platelets are hyperactive in acute stroke compared with TIA. A more intensified dual antiplatelet therapy may be of benefit for stroke patients.17547562
Storage of buffy-coat-derived platelets in additive solutions at 4 degrees C and 22 degrees C: flow cytometry analysis of platelet glycoprotein expression.
Sandgren P, Hansson M, Gulliksson H, Shanwell A
Vox sanguinis
The aim of our in vitro study is to compare the effects on platelet membrane glycoproteins that play an important role in the main functions of platelets, when platelets are stored for a period of 21 days at 4 degrees C or 22 degrees C.
Platelet concentrates (PC) were prepared from pooled buffy-coats (BC) for paired studies (total eight pools from 80 BCs) by using the OrbiSac system. We divided each pool into two PCs and stored them at 4 degrees C or 22 degrees C.
The activation marker CD62 remained almost unchanged during storage in all units. The expression of CD63 was higher in PCs stored at 22 degrees C than in those stored at 4 degrees C. No significant difference in CD41 expression was detected over time. The expression of CD42b declined during storage and even more in PCs stored at 4 degrees C until day 21 [day 14: mean flourscence intensity: 32.5 +/- 13.1 vs. 46.5 +/- 19.1], but the percentage of platelets expressing CD42b remained high in platelets stored at 4 degrees C, but gradually decreased at 22 degrees C (day 14: 95.0 +/- 1.5 vs. 59.0 +/- 9.9). Storage at 4 degrees C reduced the rate of glycolysis and maintained the pH better after day 10 than in PCs stored at 22 degrees C (day 14: 7.009 +/- 0.067 vs. 7.233 +/- 0.125). The concentration of regulated upon activation of normal T-cells expressed and secreted was higher in PCs stored at 22 degrees C than at 4 degrees C (day 7: 414.7 +/- 32.3 vs. 49.6 +/- 19.0). No response to extent of shape change and no swirling were detected at 4 degrees C.
Platelets stored at 4 degrees C retain their in vitro characteristics better than those stored at 22 degrees C, except for parameters that reflect changes in shape. Storage at 4 degrees C is not associated with an increased expression of glycoprotein (GpIb, GpIIb/IIIa) and platelet activation markers (CD62p and CD63) as compared with storage at 22 degrees C.17546597
Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 promotes concentration in multivesicular bodies of fibroblast growth factor 2 and its release through exosomes.
Ceccarelli Simona, Visco Vincenzo, Raffa Salvatore, Wakisaka Naohiro, Pagano Joseph S, Torrisi Maria Rosaria
International journal of cancer. Journal international du cancer
FGF-2, a potent angiogenic factor that is involved in tumor invasion, is known to be released extracellularly by a nonclassical secretory pathway. Recently it has become clear that Epstein-Barr virus, specifically its oncoprotein LMP1, can induce expression of angiogenic factors. Among these factors is FGF-2. LMP1 not only promotes expression of FGF-2, but also the release extracellularly of its 18-kDa isoform. We analyzed the mechanism of FGF-2 release induced by LMP1. Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy revealed colocalization of FGF-2 with LMP1 in small dots also stained positively for CD63 and cathepsin D, markers of late endosomes or multivesicular bodies. Biochemical analysis and immunoelectron microscopy of purified exosomal fractions from cotransfected cells demonstrated increased release of exosomes and the concentration of LMP1 and FGF-2 in these structures. Moreover, cotransfection appeared to induce partial redistribution of the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase, which participates in FGF-2 release, from the plasma membrane to the intracellular LMP1/FGF-2 positive dots. Treatment with ouabain, which inhibits Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase activity, partially suppressed FGF-2 secretion via exosomes in a dose-dependent manner. The results suggest that exosomes may represent a previously unrecognized mechanism for FGF-2 release mediated by LMP1, and that this pathway involves the activity of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase.17530178
Patients with metabolic syndrome exhibit higher platelet activity than those with conventional risk factors for vascular disease.
Serebruany Victor L, Malinin Alex, Ong Stephen, Atar Dan
Journal of thrombosis and thrombolysis
The metabolic syndrome is a matter of ongoing debate with regard to its existence, classification, clinical meaningfulness, and associated risks for vessel occlusion. Considering that persistent platelet activation is a cornerstone for the development of acute vascular events, and that patients with type 2 diabetes consistently exhibit high platelet activity, these characteristics may be critical for distinguishing and triageing specific features of metabolic syndrome among established risk factors for vascular disease.
We assessed the platelet activity by conventional aggregation, expression of major surface receptors by flow cytometry, and quantitatively by rapid bedside analyzers in 20 aspirin-naïve patients with documented metabolic syndrome, and compared these with 20 untreated subjects with multiple cardiovascular risk factors.
Closure time by the PFA-100 analyzer was significantly (P = 0.002) shorter in patients with metabolic syndrome indicating platelet inhibition under high shear conditions. Ultegra analyzer readings revealed increased fibrinogen binding (P = 0.0003) what in combination with the increased expression of PAC-1 (P = 0.32) strongly suggest activation of platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor. Surface expression of CD107a (P = 0.014), and SPAN-12 (P = 0.003) were also higher in patients with metabolic syndrome. In contrast, platelet aggregation induced by collagen or ADP, CD31, CD41, CD42b, CD51/61, CD62p, CD63, CD154, CD165, so as formation of platelet-monocyte aggregates, PAR-1 thrombin receptor, and thrombospondin did not differ between groups.
Patients with metabolic syndrome exhibited a higher degree of platelet activation than subjects with conventional risk factors for vascular disease. Conceptually, applying adequate antiplatelet strategies may reduce the risk of acute thrombotic events in these patients. Further prospective studies exploring this notion are encouraged.17522207
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly, budding, and cell-cell spread in T cells take place in tetraspanin-enriched plasma membrane domains.
Jolly Clare, Sattentau Quentin J
Journal of virology
Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) egress from infected CD4+ T cells is thought to be via assembly and budding at the plasma membrane and may involve components of the T-cell secretory apparatus, including tetraspanins. However, many studies on HIV-1 assembly have examined the trafficking of viral proteins in isolation, and most have used immortalized epithelial, fibroblastic, or hematopoietic cell lines that may not necessarily reflect natural infection of susceptible T cells. Here we have used immunofluorescence and cryoimmunoelectron microscopy (CEM) to examine protein transport during HIV-1 assembly in productively infected Jurkat CD4+ T cells and primary CD4+ T cells. The HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein (Env) and the core protein (Gag) colocalize strongly with CD63 and CD81 and less strongly with CD9, whereas no colocalization was seen between Env or Gag and the late endosome/lysosomal marker Lamp2. CEM revealed incorporation of CD63 and CD81 but not Lamp2 into virions budding at the plasma membrane, and this was supported by immunoprecipitation studies, confirming that HIV-1 egress in T cells is trafficked via tetraspanin-enriched membrane domains (TEMs) that are distinct from lysosomal compartments. CD63, CD81, and, to a lesser extent, CD9 were recruited to the virological synapse (VS), and antibodies against these tetraspanins reduced VS formation. We propose that HIV-1 promotes virus assembly and cell-cell transfer in T cells by targeting plasma membrane TEMs.17517107
Ses i 6, the sesame 11S globulin, can activate basophils and shows cross-reactivity with walnut in vitro.
Wallowitz M L, Chen R J Y, Tzen J T C, Teuber S S
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Sesame allergy is increasingly being reported, and multi-sensitization to peanut and tree nuts has been described. The clinical relevance and cross-reactivity of many sesame proteins, such as Ses i 6, are unknown.
The aims of this study were to perform a preliminary examination of the cross-reactivity of Ses i 6 in vitro, examine the ability of Ses i 6 to activate basophils in a modified basophil activation test (mBAT), and assess whether such an assay may help to distinguish between potentially relevant and irrelevant IgE reactivity towards 11S globulin proteins.
Inhibition immunoblotting and chicken anti-rJug r 4 antibodies were used to determine the cross-reactivity of rSes i 6. Basophils from atopic donors were stripped of resident IgE before passive sensitization with food-allergic sera and challenged with protein extracts or recombinant protein. Basophil activation was measured using two activation markers, CD203c and CD63, via flow cytometry.
IgE immunoblotting showed cross-reactivity between rJug r 4 and rSes i 6 using sera from two human donors and chicken IgY. Additionally, rSes i 6 activated basophils passively sensitized with sesame-allergic sera. Cross-reactive serum from a sesame-allergic but walnut-tolerant donor was not able to activate basophils when challenged by walnut extract despite IgE reactivity to walnut determined by immunoblotting.
The sesame 11S globulin shows partial immunological cross-reactivity with walnut, and although it is classified as a minor allergen, activated basophils sensitized with serum from seven out of eleven sesame-allergic donors. Additionally, the mBAT may help distinguish between clinically relevant and irrelevant in vitro IgE cross-reactivity of seed storage proteins in nuts and seeds and thus warrants use in further studies.17513769
Tubulation of class II MHC compartments is microtubule dependent and involves multiple endolysosomal membrane proteins in primary dendritic cells.
Vyas Jatin M, Kim You-Me, Artavanis-Tsakonas Katerina, Love J Christopher, Van der Veen Annemarthe G, Ploegh Hidde L
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Immature dendritic cells (DCs) capture exogenous Ags in the periphery for eventual processing in endolysosomes. Upon maturation by TLR agonists, DCs deliver peptide-loaded class II MHC molecules from these compartments to the cell surface via long tubular structures (endolysosomal tubules). The nature and rules that govern the movement of these DC compartments are unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that the tubules contain multiple proteins including the class II MHC molecules and LAMP1, a lysosomal resident protein, as well as CD63 and CD82, members of the tetraspanin family. Endolysosomal tubules can be stained with acidotropic dyes, indicating that they are extensions of lysosomes. However, the proper trafficking of class II MHC molecules themselves is not necessary for endolysosomal tubule formation. DCs lacking MyD88 can also form endolysosomal tubules, demonstrating that MyD88-dependent TLR activation is not necessary for the formation of this compartment. Endolysosomal tubules in DCs exhibit dynamic and saltatory movement, including bidirectional travel. Measured velocities are consistent with motor-based movement along microtubules. Indeed, nocodazole causes the collapse of endolysosomal tubules. In addition to its association with microtubules, endolysosomal tubules follow the plus ends of microtubules as visualized in primary DCs expressing end binding protein 1 (EB1)-enhanced GFP.17506821
Arrested maturation of Neisseria-containing phagosomes in the absence of the lysosome-associated membrane proteins, LAMP-1 and LAMP-2.
Binker Marcelo G, Cosen-Binker Laura I, Terebiznik Mauricio R, Mallo Gustavo V, McCaw Shannon E, Eskelinen Eeva-Liisa, Willenborg Marion, Brumell John H, Saftig Paul, Grinstein Sergio, Gray-Owen Scott D
Cellular microbiology
Mature, microbicidal phagosomes are rich in the lysosome-associated membrane proteins, LAMP-1 and LAMP-2, two highly glycosylated proteins presumed to form a protective barrier lining the phagosomal membrane. Pathogenic Neisseria secrete a protease that selectively cleaves LAMP-1, suggesting a critical role for LAMP proteins in the microbicidal competence of phagosomes. To determine the requirement for LAMP proteins in bacterial phagocytosis, we employed embryonic fibroblasts isolated from knockout mice lacking lamp-1, lamp-2 or both genes, as well as small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of LAMP expression in a human epithelial cell line. Like wild-type cells, those lacking either LAMP-1 or LAMP-2 alone formed phagosomes that gradually acquired microbicidal activity and curtailed bacterial growth. In contrast, LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 double-deficient fibroblasts failed to kill engulfed Neisseria gonorrhoeae. In these cells, maturation was arrested prior to the acquisition of Rab7. As a result, the Rab7-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP, a Rab7 effector) was not recruited to the phagosomes, which were consequently unable to undergo dynein/dynactin-mediated centripetal displacement along microtubules and remained in a predominantly peripheral location. The inability of such phagosomes to migrate towards lysosomes likely contributed to their incomplete maturation and inability to eliminate bacteria. These findings suggest that neisserial degradation of LAMP-1 is not sufficient to affect its survival within the phagosome, and establish LAMP proteins as critical components in the process whereby phagosomes acquire microbicidal capabilities.17498581
Platelet surface CD62P and CD63, mean platelet volume, and soluble/platelet P-selectin as indexes of platelet function in atrial fibrillation: a comparison of "healthy control subjects" and "disease control subjects" in sinus rhythm.
Choudhury Anirban, Chung Irene, Blann Andrew D, Lip Gregory Y H
Journal of the American College of Cardiology
The aim of this work was to comprehensively study the role of platelets in atrial fibrillation (AF), in relation to the underlying cardiovascular diseases and type of AF, and to analyze the effect of antithrombotic treatment on different aspects of platelet activation.
Platelet activation is present in nonvalvular AF, but there is debate whether this is due to AF itself and/or to underlying cardiovascular diseases.
A total of 121 AF patients were compared with 65 "healthy control subjects" and 78 "disease control subjects" in sinus rhythm. Platelet activation was assessed using 4 different aspects of platelet pathophysiology: 1) platelet surface expression of CD62P (P-selectin) and CD63 (a lysosomal glycoprotein) (by flow cytometry); 2) mean platelet volume (MPV) (by flow cytometry); 3) plasma levels of soluble P-selectin (sP-selectin, enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay); and 4) total amount of P-selectin per platelet (pP-selectin) ("platelet lysis" assay).
Both AF patients and "disease control subjects" had higher levels of CD62P (p < 0.001), CD63 (p < 0.001), and sP-selectin (p < 0.001) compared with "healthy control subjects," with no difference between AF patients and "disease control subjects." Patients with permanent AF had higher levels of sP-selectin (p = 0.014) and MPV (p = 0.025) compared with those with paroxysmal AF. The presence of AF independently affected the levels of CD62P expression, while "high-risk" AF patients (CHADS score > or =2) had higher levels of CD62P compared with those with "low risk." Introducing warfarin resulted in a reduction of pP-selectin (p = 0.013).
There is a degree of excess of platelet activation in AF compared with "healthy control subjects," but no significant difference between AF patients and "disease control subjects" in sinus rhythm. Platelet activation may differ according to the subtype of AF, but this is not in excess of the underlying comorbidities that lead to AF. Platelet activation in AF may be due to underlying cardiovascular diseases, rather than due to AF per se.17475656
Maturation of blood-derived dendritic cells enhances human immunodeficiency virus type 1 capture and transmission.
Izquierdo-Useros Nuria, Blanco Julià, Erkizia Itziar, Fernández-Figueras Maria Teresa, Borràs Francesc E, Naranjo-Gómez Mar, Bofill Margarita, Ruiz Lidia, Clotet Bonaventura, Martinez-Picado Javier
Journal of virology
Dendritic cells (DCs) are specialized antigen-presenting cells. However, DCs exposed to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) are also able to transmit a vigorous cytopathic infection to CD4(+) T cells, a process that has been frequently related to the ability of DC-SIGN to bind HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins. The maturation of DCs can increase the efficiency of HIV-1 transmission through trans infection. We aimed to comparatively study the effect of maturation in monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs) and blood-derived myeloid DCs during the HIV-1 capture process. In vitro capture and transmission of envelope-pseudotyped HIV-1 and its homologous replication-competent virus to susceptible target cells were assessed by p24(gag) detection, luciferase activity, and both confocal and electron microscopy. Maturation of MDDCs or myeloid DCs enhanced the active capture of HIV-1 in a DC-SIGN- and viral envelope glycoprotein-independent manner, increasing the life span of trapped virus. Moreover, higher viral transmission of mature DCs to CD4(+) T cells was highly dependent on active viral capture, a process mediated through cholesterol-enriched domains. Mature DCs concentrated captured virus in a single large vesicle staining for CD81 and CD63 tetraspanins, while immature DCs lacked these structures, suggesting different intracellular trafficking processes. These observations help to explain the greater ability of mature DCs to transfer HIV-1 to T lymphocytes, a process that can potentially contribute to the viral dissemination at lymph nodes in vivo, where viral replication takes place and there is a continuous interaction between susceptible T cells and mature DCs.17438075
In macrophages, HIV-1 assembles into an intracellular plasma membrane domain containing the tetraspanins CD81, CD9, and CD53.
Deneka Magdalena, Pelchen-Matthews Annegret, Byland Rahel, Ruiz-Mateos Ezequiel, Marsh Mark
The Journal of cell biology
In macrophages, HIV-1 has been shown to bud into intracellular structures that contain the late endosome marker CD63. We show that these organelles are not endosomes, but an internally sequestered plasma membrane domain. Using immunofluorescence microscopy and immunoelectron microscopy, we find that HIV-1 buds into a compartment that contains the tetraspanins CD81, CD9, and CD53. On uninfected macrophages, these proteins are seen at the cell surface and in intracellular vacuole-like structures with a complex content of vesicles and interconnected membranes that lack endosome markers, including CD63. Significantly, these structures are accessible to small tracers (horseradish peroxidase or ruthenium red) applied to cells at 4 degrees C, indicating that they are connected to the cell surface. HIV assembles on, and accumulates within, these intracellular compartments. Furthermore, CD63 is recruited to the virus-containing structures and incorporated into virions. These results indicate that, in macrophages, HIV-1 exploits a previously undescribed intracellular plasma membrane domain to assemble infectious particles.17432791
Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of the left coronoid process: report of a unique case with clinical, histopathologic, and immunohistochemical findings, and a review of the literature.
Angiero Francesca, Vinci Raffaele, Sidoni Angelo, Stefani Michele
Quintessence international (Berlin, Germany : 1985)
Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma (MCS) is a rare malignant neoplasm of bone or soft tissue origin, locally aggressive, rare in the oral cavity, of which fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the English literature. This is the first case described of this type of tumor affecting the coronoid process. The report describes a unique case of MCS in a 64-year-old woman who presented with swelling and pain at the left preauricular area just anterior to the left tragus. An orthopantomograph showed a large mass in the temporomandibular joint involving the left coronoid process and extending to the left ramus of the mandible. Biopsy and histopathologic examination revealed a biphasic pattern, composed of an undifferentiated small round-cell component surrounding a myxoid of malignant cartilage; a focally pericytic vascular pattern resembling hemangiopericytoma was observed. Immunohistochemical studies were positive for CD99, S-100, and CD45 and negative for desmin, actin, chromogranin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and cytokeratin. The tumor was treated by extensive hemimandibulectomy followed by reconstruction of the area. There was no evidence of disease at the 8-year follow-up. Previously reported cases are reviewed as well.17417648
Cyclic AMP-regulated exocytosis of Escherichia coli from infected bladder epithelial cells.
Bishop Brian L, Duncan Mathew J, Song Jeongmin, Li Guojie, Zaas David, Abraham Soman N
Nature medicine
The superficial bladder epithelium is a powerful barrier to urine and also serves as a regulator of bladder volume, which is achieved by apical exocytosis of specialized fusiform vesicles during distension of the bladder. We report that type 1 fimbriated uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) circumvents the bladder barrier by harboring in these Rab27b/CD63-positive and cAMP-regulatable fusiform vesicles within bladder epithelial cells (BECs). Incorporation of UPEC into BEC fusiform compartments enabled bacteria to escape elimination during voiding and to re-emerge in the urine as the bladder distended. Notably, treatment of UPEC-infected mice with a drug that increases intracellular cAMP and induces exocytosis of fusiform vesicles reduced the number of intracellular E. coli.17397547
Regulatory network of inflammation downstream of proteinase-activated receptors.
Saban Ricardo, D'Andrea Michael R, Andrade-Gordon Patricia, Derian Claudia K, Dozmorov Igor, Ihnat Michael A, Hurst Robert E, Simpson Cindy, Saban Marcia R
BMC physiology
Protease-activated receptors (PAR) are present in the urinary bladder, and their expression is altered in response to inflammation. PARs are a unique class of G protein-coupled that carry their own ligands, which remain cryptic until unmasked by proteolytic cleavage. Although the canonical signal transduction pathway downstream of PAR activation and coupling with various G proteins is known and leads to the rapid transcription of genes involved in inflammation, the effect of PAR activation on the downstream transcriptome is unknown. We have shown that intravesical administration of PAR-activating peptides leads to an inflammatory reaction characterized by edema and granulocyte infiltration. Moreover, the inflammatory response to intravesical instillation of known pro-inflammatory stimuli such as E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS), substance P (SP), and antigen was strongly attenuated by PAR1- and to a lesser extent by PAR2-deficiency.
Here, cDNA array experiments determined inflammatory genes whose expression is dependent on PAR1 activation. For this purpose, we compared the alteration in gene expression in wild type and PAR1-/- mice induced by classical pro-inflammatory stimuli (LPS, SP, and antigen). 75 transcripts were considered to be dependent on PAR-1 activation and further annotated in silico by Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) and gene ontology (GO). Selected transcripts were target validated by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR). Among PAR1-dependent transcripts, the following have been implicated in the inflammatory process: b2m, ccl7, cd200, cd63, cdbpd, cfl1, dusp1, fkbp1a, fth1, hspb1, marcksl1, mmp2, myo5a, nfkbia, pax1, plaur, ppia, ptpn1, ptprcap, s100a10, sim2, and tnfaip2. However, a balanced response to signals of injury requires a transient cellular activation of a panel of genes together with inhibitory systems that temper the overwhelming inflammation. In this context, the activation of genes such as dusp1 and nfkbia seems to counter-balance the inflammatory response to PAR activation by limiting prolonged activation of p38 MAPK and increased cytokine production. In contrast, transcripts such as arf6 and dcnt1 that are involved in the mechanism of PAR re-sensitization would tend to perpetuate the inflammatory reaction in response to common pro-inflammatory stimuli.
The combination of cDNA array results and genomic networks reveals an overriding participation of PAR1 in bladder inflammation, provides a working model for the involvement of downstream signaling, and evokes testable hypotheses regarding the transcriptome downstream of PAR1 activation. It remains to be determined whether or not mechanisms targeting PAR1 gene silencing or PAR1 blockade will ameliorate the clinical manifestation of cystitis.17390088
PMN degranulation in relation to CD63 expression and genetic polymorphisms in healthy individuals and COPD patients.
Zhang X Z, Paré P D, Sandford A J
International journal of molecular medicine
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) play an important role in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) pathogenesis. The tetraspanin CD63 is a membrane marker of azurophilic granules and is actively involved in the process of PMN endocytosis and azurophilic granule exocytosis. In this study, we investigated genetic polymorphisms of the CD63 gene, quantified CD63 expression and PMN myeloperoxidase (MPO) release in healthy individuals and COPD patients. We evaluated the potential correlations between genetic polymorphisms and gene expression and MPO release. COPD patients had significantly lower CD63 expression and released less MPO upon chemokine stimulation compared with the healthy individuals. Eleven putative polymorphisms in the CD63 gene were investigated but only three were polymorphic in our study subjects. None of the polymorphisms was associated with CD63 expression in either the healthy subjects or the COPD patients. However, the 8041C/G polymorphism, which is located 3' to the CD63 gene, was associated with MPO release in the healthy subjects. The CC genotype was associated with greater MPO release than the GG genotype (P=0.007). These results suggest that COPD patients have different patterns of CD63 expression and PMN mediator release than healthy individuals. It is likely that genetic variants have limited effect on CD63 expression and MPO release in the context of COPD but their role in other diseases has yet to be determined.17381240
HIV-1 buds predominantly at the plasma membrane of primary human macrophages.
Welsch Sonja, Keppler Oliver T, Habermann Anja, Allespach Ina, Krijnse-Locker Jacomine, Kräusslich Hans-Georg
PLoS pathogens
HIV-1 assembly and release are believed to occur at the plasma membrane in most host cells with the exception of primary macrophages, for which exclusive budding at late endosomes has been reported. Here, we applied a novel ultrastructural approach to assess HIV-1 budding in primary macrophages in an immunomarker-independent manner. Infected macrophages were fed with BSA-gold and stained with the membrane-impermeant dye ruthenium red to identify endosomes and the plasma membrane, respectively. Virus-filled vacuolar structures with a seemingly intracellular localization displayed intense staining with ruthenium red, but lacked endocytosed BSA-gold, defining them as plasma membrane. Moreover, HIV budding profiles were virtually excluded from gold-filled endosomes while frequently being detected on ruthenium red-positive membranes. The composition of cellular marker proteins incorporated into HIV-1 supported a plasma membrane-derived origin of the viral envelope. Thus, contrary to current opinion, the plasma membrane is the primary site of HIV-1 budding also in infected macrophages.17366974
[Studies on the protective effect of the mutant of Sj23 DNA vaccine against schistosomiasis].
Zhu Yan-Hong, Han Qing-Xia, Ren Wei, Niu An-Ou, Li Liu-Zhe
Zhongguo ji sheng chong xue yu ji sheng chong bing za zhi = Chinese journal of parasitology & parasitic diseases
To investigate the protective immunity of the vaccine against schistosomiasis, a mutant of Mr 23 000 membrane protein DNA (Sj23DNA) without the homologous sequence of ME491.
The mutant of Sj23 DNA with no homologous sequence of ME491 on the cell membrane of human melanoma was obtained by overlap PCR. The mutant was transfected into human embryonic kidney cells of the line HEK293. Indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFAT) was used to detect the expressed protein. Expression of the mutant of Sj23DNA in muscular cells of mice was conducted through vaccinating the mouse with 100 microg purified plasmids by injecting them into the quadriceps muscle of thigh. Four weeks after the immunization, the quadriceps muscles were taken and cryostat sections were prepared for detecting the expression by IFAT. Forty BALB/c mice were randomly divided into four groups and injected with the mutant of pcDNA3-Sj23 plasmid DNA, pcDNA3-Sj23 plasmid DNA, pcDNA3 blank plasmid (100 microg per mouse) and sterile saline (30 microl per mouse) respectively. Four weeks after the immunization, mice were challenged with cercariae (40+/-2 cercariae per mouse) by abdominal skin penetration. Mice were then killed 6 weeks later, perfusion and squash methods were carried out to collect the adult worms and the number of eggs per gram of liver tissue was calculated. Worm and egg reduction rates were used to evaluate the protective immunity.
Specific fluorescence was demonstrated in muscular cells of mice vaccinated with the mutant of pcDNA3-Sj23. The worm reduction rate and egg reduction rate were 40.3% and 42.8% respectively in the mutant of pcDNA3-Sj23 group, which were higher than those in the pcDNA3-Sj23 plasmid group (33.1% and 28.9% respectively). The difference between these two groups was significant (P<0.05).
The modified Sj23DNA without the homologous sequence of ME491 induces higher protection against Schistosoma japonicum infection in mice than that of Sj23DNA.17362252
Two different profiles of peach allergy in the north of Spain.
Gamboa P M, Cáceres O, Antepara I, Sánchez-Monge R, Ahrazem O, Salcedo G, Barber D, Lombardero M, Sanz M L
Allergy
Peach allergy has two different patterns: central Europe with oral allergy syndrome (OAS) related to a primary sensitization to birch pollen Bet v 1 and profilins and southern Europe with mostly systemic symptoms, in many cases due to sensitization to lipid-transfer proteins.
Thirty peach-allergic patients with positive skin and food challenge tests and 29 control subjects were included. Skin prick tests (SPT) with inhalant allergens, commercial peach and apple extracts and native Pru p 3 were performed. In vitro specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E to grass pollen, birch pollen, peach, apple, rBet v 1, rBet v 2 and rPhl p 12 was determined by CAP, and rBet v 1, rMal d 1, rMal d 4, rMal d 3 and rPru p 3 using the ADVIA-Centaur platform. Basophil activation test (BAT) with commercial peach extract, commercial apple extract, nPru p 3, rMal d 3, rMal d 1 and rMal d 4 was also performed.
Pru p 3 was the major allergen in the patient group from northern Spain. Sensitization to this allergen was found in 100% of the patients with systemic symptoms or contact urticaria. Only 60% of OAS patients were sensitized to Pru p 3, being all of them sensitized to profilins and 60% of them to allergens of the Bet v 1 family. Specific IgE determination and BAT using recombinant allergens (rPru p 3) show specificity and sensitivity values close to 100%.
Most peach-allergic patients coming from the north of Spain present systemic symptoms after ingestion of peach, Pru p 3 being the main allergen. Patients with OAS present profilin-Bet v 1-related sensitization. Thus, in the north of Spain our patients show a mixed central-south Europe pattern with LTP-profilin-Bet v 1 sensitization depending on the symptoms presented. The use of natural and recombinant plant allergens, allows establishing the sensitization patterns to the different allergens studied.17356575
Antiplatelet properties of escitalopram in patients with the metabolic syndrome: a dose-ranging in vitro study.
Atar Dan, Malinin Alex, Pokov Alex, van Zyl Louis, Frasure-Smith Nancy, Lesperance Francois, Serebruany Victor L
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology
There is an increasing body of evidence suggesting that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors exhibit clinical benefit beyond treating depression, by simultaneously inhibiting platelet activity. We recently demonstrated that escitalopram (ESC), but not its major metabolites, inhibits multiple platelet biomarkers in healthy volunteers. Considering that the metabolic syndrome represents one of the major risk factors for vascular disease, we here determined how ESC affects platelet activity in such patients. We assessed the in vitro effects of preincubation with escalating (50-200 nM/l) concentrations of ESC on platelet aggregation, expression of major surface receptors by flow cytometry, and quantitatively by platelet function analyzers. Blood samples were obtained from 20 aspirin-naïve patients with documented metabolic syndrome. Pretreatment of blood samples with medium (150 nM/l), or high (200 nM/l) doses of ESC resulted in a significant inhibition of platelet aggregation induced by ADP (p=0.007) and by collagen (p=0.004). Surface platelet expression of GPIb (CD42, p=0.03), LAMP-3 (CD63, p=0.04), and GP37 (CD165, p=0.03) was decreased in the ESC-pretreated samples. Closure time by the PFA-100 analyzer was prolonged after the 200 nM/l dose (p=0.02), indicating platelet inhibition under high shear conditions. On the other hand, the lowest tested concentration of ESC (50 nM/l) did not affect platelet activity in these patients. The in vitro antiplatelet characteristics of ESC in patients with the metabolic syndrome are similar to those in healthy volunteers. However, higher ESC doses are required to induce equally potent platelet inhibition. These data justify prospective ex vivo studies with the highest therapeutic dose to determine the potential clinical advantage of ESC in high-risk patients with vascular disease.17350713
CD63 as a biomarker for predicting the clinical outcomes in adenocarcinoma of lung.
Kwon Mi Seon, Shin Seung-Hun, Yim Seon-Hee, Lee Kyo Young, Kang Hyun-Mi, Kim Tae-Min, Chung Yeun-Jun
Lung cancer (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
The prognosis of lung cancer is still poor, since there are few early detection tools available yet. So, it is important to identify more efficient and clinically applicable biomarkers associated with the prognosis in as earlier stages as possible.
In this study, we observed the expression of CD63 in 90 cases of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) to explore the potential of this molecule as a prognostic biomarker for lung cancer subtypes using real-time quantitative RT-PCR and tissue microarray based immunohistochemistry.
Majority of NSCLCs (75.8%) showed lower CD63 RNA level (less than half) than normal tissue. Notably, all SqCs showed low-expression except one case, while AdCs showed diverse range of expression. CD63 protein expression level was largely compatible with RNA level. Totally, 63.3% of NSCLC were CD63 protein expression negative. All SqCs were negative, while majority (70.2%) of adenocarcinomas (AdCs) were positive. CD63 protein negativity was significantly associated with SqCs type, larger tumor size, and advanced stage. In AdCs, CD63 negativity was associated with poor survival (p=0.008). This association was also significant in earlier stage (I and II) AdCs (p=0.041), but not in advanced stage AdCs. After being adjusted for age and sex by Cox regression and stratified by stages, CD63 negativity still showed borderline association with poor survival as an independent predictor (p=0.076, HR=2.3).
Taken together, these results suggest that CD63 can be a biomarker for predicting the prognosis in earlier stage of lung AdCs. Our findings can be a clue to investigate the role of CD63 in tumorigenesis of AdCs of lung and other cancers.17335884
Expression of activation markers on basophils in a controlled model of anaphylaxis.
Gober Laura M, Eckman John A, Sterba Patricia M, Vasagar Kavitha, Schroeder John T, Golden David B K, Saini Sarbjit S
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Anaphylaxis has variable clinical presentations and lacks reliable biomarkers. Expression of activation markers on basophils has been useful in assessing sensitization in IgE-mediated diseases but has not been examined in vivo in anaphylaxis.
The study's goals were to assess the baseline expression of activation markers on basophils in individuals with a sting reaction history, the degree of change in expression of these markers after intentional sting challenge, and the relationship between in vitro and in vivo activation marker expression.
Patients allergic to insect venom were enrolled and grouped by clinical category defined by a history of a systemic or large local reaction and use of venom immunotherapy. Blood was collected before and after sting challenge. Enriched basophils were analyzed for activation marker expression. In select subjects, basophils were examined after in vitro stimulation with insect venom for activation marker expression and histamine release.
Of 35 sting-challenge participants, 21 provided adequate samples for analysis. Pre-sting basophil CD63 expression was significantly higher in systemic reactors on immunotherapy. Following sting challenge, the rise in basophil CD69 expression and CD203c was significantly higher in systemic reactors on immunotherapy. Levels of activation markers on basophils were greater after in vitro venom stimulation than after in vivo challenge.
Broader shifts in expression of basophil activation markers after in vivo challenge occurred among subjects with a history of in vivo systemic anaphylaxis despite venom immunotherapy.
Basophil activation markers may be potential biomarkers for anaphylaxis.17332245
Asymmetric cell division within the human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell compartment: identification of asymmetrically segregating proteins.
Beckmann Julia, Scheitza Sebastian, Wernet Peter, Fischer Johannes C, Giebel Bernd
Blood
The findings that many primitive human hematopoietic cells give rise to daughter cells that adopt different cell fates and/or show different proliferation kinetics suggest that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) can divide asymmetrically. However, definitive experimental demonstration is lacking due to the current absence of asymmetrically segregating marker molecules within the primitive hematopoietic cell compartment. Thus, it remains an open question as to whether HSCs/HPCs have the capability to divide asymmetrically, or whether the differences that have been observed are established by extrinsic mechanisms that act on postmitotic progenitors. Here, we have identified 4 proteins (CD53, CD62L/L-selectin, CD63/lamp-3, and CD71/transferrin receptor) that segregate differentially in about 20% of primitive human hematopoietic cells that divide in stroma-free cultures. Therefore, this indicates for the first time that HSCs/HPCs have the capability to divide asymmetrically. Remarkably, these proteins, in combination with the surrogate stem-cell marker CD133, help to discriminate the more primitive human cultivated HSCs/HPCs. Since 3 of these proteins, the transferrin receptor and the tetraspanins CD53 and CD63, are endosomal-associated proteins, they may provide a link between the endosomal compartment and the process of asymmetric cell division within the HSC/HPC compartment.17321450
Nonneural granular cell tumor of the oral cavity: a case report and review of the literature.
Lerman Mark, Freedman Paul D
Oral surgery, oral medicine, oral pathology, oral radiology, and endodontics
Nonneural granular cell tumors (NNGCTs) are rare benign neoplasms originally described in 1991 by Leboit et al. Typical granular cell tumors (GCTs) are commonly encountered in the oral cavity, but NNGCTs, unlike GCTs, are S-100 negative and may display cytologic atypia, allowing for misdiagnosis as a more aggressive lesion. We report a case of a 43-year-old male with a lesion of the mandible that we believe to be the first intraoral example of an NNGCT.17306868
Effect of physiologic shear stresses and calcium on agonist-induced platelet aggregation, secretion, and thromboxane A2 formation.
Viisoreanu Delia, Gear Adrian
Thrombosis research
Platelets in vivo react under low-shear venous-flow as well as high-shear arterial-flow conditions. Because most studies were carried out at low shear stresses, platelet granule secretion at high shear has not been examined thoroughly. We investigated the secretion of all three types of platelet granules and thromboxane A(2) formation at high shear after stimulation with ADP or thrombin.
Washed human platelets were reacted rapidly (<5 s) in a quenched-flow system simulating high-shear arterial-flow conditions (30 dyn/cm(2)). For comparison, we employed a low-shear stirring system (1-5 dyn/cm(2)). Serotonin release and membrane exposure of P-selectin (alpha), CD63 (dense), and CD107a (lysosomes) were used to assess granule secretion. Aggregation was evaluated by resistive-particle counting of the remaining platelet singlets.
ADP and thrombin induced similar strong levels of aggregation ( approximately 70%) at high shear by 5 s. Thrombin also caused release of about 40% of all alpha and dense granules within 5 s. However, by 5 s at high shear, ADP failed to induce significant granule secretion or thromboxane A(2) formation (<5%, p>0.05). By 10 min at low shear, ADP caused secretion and thromboxane A(2) formation only at non-physiological, micromolar extracellular Ca(2+) concentrations. These results emphasize the ability of thrombin to initiate multiple aspects of platelet function within seconds, while ADP was only able to induce rapid aggregation.17303250
Baseline level of platelet-leukocyte aggregates, platelet CD63 expression, and soluble P-selectin concentration in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder: a pilot study.
Vidović Andelko, Vilibić Maja, Markotić Alemka, Sabioncello Ante, Gotovac Katja, Folnegović-Smalc Vera, Dekaris Dragan
Psychiatry research
Platelets may have an important role in the development of cardiovascular disease (CVD) as a result of chronic stress. We conducted a pilot study to evaluate the effect of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) on baseline platelet activation. Platelet-leukocyte aggregates (PLA) and CD63 expression were measured by flow cytometry, and soluble (s)P-selectin concentration was determined in sera of 20 Croatian male combat veterans with PTSD and 20 healthy civilians. Groups were matched in sex, age, body mass index (BMI) and traditional CVD risk factors. Our data showed no differences in measured parameters. Other platelet activation markers should be determined and a larger sample size used in future studies.17287016
Platelet activation in acute, decompensated congestive heart failure.
Chung Irene, Choudhury Anirban, Lip Gregory Y H
Thrombosis research
Congestive heart failure (CHF) is associated with increased risk of venous thromboembolism, stroke and sudden death. This may be related to abnormalities of thrombogenesis and platelet activation. A comprehensive assessment of platelet (dys)function in acute decompensated heart failure (AHF) is lacking, and we hypothesised that such patients would show greater abnormalities in platelet indices, compared to stable CHF and healthy controls.
We measured soluble P-selectin (sP-sel, by ELISA); platelet surface P-selectin (CD62P%G) and CD63%G expression by flow cytometry; and platelet structural indices [mean platelet volume (MPV), mean platelet mass (MPM) and mean platelet component (MPC)] in 22 patients with AHF (pre- and posttreatment), who were compared to 68 patients with stable congestive heart failure (CHF, all with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <50%) and 23 healthy controls.
There were significant differences between the 3 study groups in MPV (p<0.001), MPC (p=0.001), platelet surface P-selectin (CD62P%G, p<0.0001) and platelet surface CD63P%G (p=0.017). On post-hoc analyses, AHF patients had higher platelet surface P-selectin (CD62P%G) compared to stable CHF patients and healthy controls (Tukey's test, all p<0.05), whilst CD63%P was similarly high in both disease groups, compared to healthy controls. Platelet surface P-selectin (p=0.032), CD63 (p=0.024) and CD40L (p=0.024) were significantly reduced following treatment of AHF, though platelet morphology and sP-sel levels were not significantly changed.
AHF patients demonstrate some abnormalities of platelet activation compared to stable CHF patients and healthy controls. These platelet abnormalities are modified by treatment, raising the possibility that platelets may partly contribute to the pathophysiology of adverse complications associated with AHF.17279322
The significance of platelet activation in rheumatoid arthritis.
Wang Feng, Wang Nian-Song, Yan Chun-Gen, Li Jun-Hui, Tang Ling-Quan
Clinical rheumatology
We evaluated the significance of platelet activation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The expression of CD62P and CD63 by platelets was determined using flow cytometry in 18 active RA patients, 10 remission RA and 15 normal controls. Meanwhile, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein was also determined in all groups. The expression of CD62P in active RA patients (11.88 +/- 2.47%) was significantly higher than that in remission RA group (2.85 +/- 1.60%; P < 0.01) and control group (2.78 +/- 1.04%; P < 0.01). The expression of CD63 in active RA patients (9.90 +/- 3.02%) was significantly higher than that in remission RA group (4.11 +/- 2.00%; P < 0.01) and control group (4.13 +/- 1.85%; P < 0.01). The level of CRP (54.33 +/- 23.35 mg/l) and ESR (86.06 +/- 33.67 mm/h) in active RA patients was higher than that in remission RA group (2.55 +/- 1.01 mg/l, 14.70 +/- 4.57 mm/h; P < 0.01 for both) and normal control group (3.21 +/- 2.18 mg/l, 12.25 +/- 5.05 mm/h; P < 0.01 for both). There was a positive correlation between CD62P and ESR (r = 0.5224, P < 0.01) and also a positive correlation between CD62P and CRP (r = 0.7048, P < 0.01) as well as between CD63 and ESR (r = 0.4476, P < 0.05) but no correlation between CD63 and CRP. Platelet activation may be a sign of RA exacerbation.17278422
[A preliminary study of an inherited macrothrombocytopenia disorder with abnormal large granules].
Wu Shu-Yan, Wang Zhao-Yue, Dai Lan, Huang Rui, Wang Xiang-Ying, Li Su-An, Mao Di-Hua, Ruan Chang-Geng
Zhonghua xue ye xue za zhi = Zhonghua xueyexue zazhi
To study the platelet morphology and function of an inherited macrothrombocytopenia disorder with abnormal large granules.
Platelet size and structure were investigated by both light microscopy and electron microscopy. The platelet membrane expression of GP I b, GP II b, GPIII a, P-selectin and CD63 were analyzed by using respective monoclonal antibodies. Platelet 5-hydroxy-tryptamine was measured with spectrophotofluorometer.
Both the patient and her father had large granules in their platelets, with exocytosis being easily observed. The expressions of GP I b, GP II b and GP II a on the platelets were in normal range, while P-selectin and CD63 were somewhat increased. The abnormal large granules were not the alpha granules, lysosomes or dense bodies.
Both morphological and functional abnormalities of the platelets from the patient are clearly distinguishable from other hereditary giant platelet disorders. It would probably represent a novel platelet disorder.17275019
Flow cytometry for basophil activation markers: the measurement of CD203c up-regulation is as reliable as CD63 expression in the diagnosis of cat allergy.
Ocmant Annick, Peignois Yannick, Mulier Sandra, Hanssens Laurence, Michils Alain, Schandené Liliane
Journal of immunological methods
The flow cytometric basophil activation test (BAT), based on the detection of allergen-induced CD63 expression, has been proved effective in the diagnosis of various IgE-mediated allergies. However, there is not yet consensus about the suitability of CD203c expression as a specific basophil activation marker and its diagnostic reliability. The goal of the present study was to compare measurement of CD63 and CD203c expression using BAT in a model of cat allergy and to determine optimal experimental conditions for both markers. Heparinized whole blood samples from 20 cat allergic patients and 19 controls were incubated with Fel d1 (relevant allergen) or anti-FcepsilonRI (positive control) either in IL-3 or IL-3-free conditions. An optimal gating of basophils was achieved in triple staining protocols: anti-IgE PE/anti-CD45 PerCP/anti-CD63 FITC or anti-IgE FITC/anti-CD45 PerCP/anti-CD203c PE. We demonstrated that IL-3 significantly enhanced CD63-induced expression by basophils obtained from cat allergic patients in response to Fel d1. Sensitivity was found to be 100%. The CD203c protocol, when performed under IL-3-free conditions, also demonstrated 100% sensitivity. Only one of the control subjects was positive in both tests. In conclusion, using well-defined experimental conditions, the measurement of CD203c up-regulation on basophils in response to specific allergens is as reliable as CD63-BAT for the in vitro diagnosis of patients with IgE-mediated allergy.17264948
Tissue factor-enriched vesicles are taken up by platelets and induce platelet aggregation in the presence of factor VIIa.
Lopez-Vilchez Irene, Escolar Gines, Diaz-Ricart Maribel, Fuste Berta, Galan Ana M, White James G
Thrombosis and haemostasis
We investigated the interactions of vesicles containing human tissue factor (TF) with platelets and evaluated responses induced by rFVIIa using standard aggregometry, ultrastructural and flow-cytometry techniques. Washed platelets were exposed to a preparation of placental human TF (pTF) or to a relipidated formulation of recombinant human TF (rTF). Under stirring conditions, pTF induced reversible aggregation with platelets returning to their resting state after 5 minutes. This reversible response to pTF was partially inhibited by antibodies against CD62-P, but not by antithrombin agents, and was not observed with rTF. Sequential ultrastructural studies revealed uptake of both TF preparations by platelets involving traffic of vesicles through channels of the open canalicular system (OCS). Immunocytochemical studies on cryosections identified TF in the OCS, and occasionally in the alpha-granules of the platelets. These processes were faster with pTF than with rTF, but both TF preparations accumulated in platelets at the end of incubation periods. Flow cytometry studies revealed the presence of other cellular antigens (CD62-P, CD14 and CD45) associated to the pTF. Addition of rFVIIa to washed platelets exposed to pTF or rTF, caused a thrombin dependent irreversible platelet aggregation. Our studies demonstrate that platelets possess mechanisms to capture and incorporate TF-rich vesicles. These processes are accelerated by the presence of other cellular antigens in the vesicles. Our findings may explain the hemostatic action of rFVIIa in severely hemodiluted patients, but are also relevant for the understanding of potential implications of TF-associated to platelets in the propagation of thrombus.17202227
The actin cytoskeleton regulates exocytosis of all neutrophil granule subsets.
Jog Neelakshi R, Rane Madhavi J, Lominadze George, Luerman Gregory C, Ward Richard A, McLeish Kenneth R
American journal of physiology. Cell physiology
A comprehensive analysis of the role of the actin cytoskeleton in exocytosis of the four different neutrophil granule subsets had not been performed previously. Immunoblot analysis showed that, compared with plasma membrane, there was less actin associated with secretory vesicles (SV, 75%), gelatinase granules (GG, 40%), specific granules (SG, 10%), and azurophil granules (AG, 5%). Exocytosis of SV, SG, and AG was measured as increased plasma membrane expression of CD35, CD66b, and CD63, respectively, with flow cytometry, and GG exocytosis was measured as gelatinase release with an ELISA. N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP) stimulated exocytosis of SV, GG, and SG with an ED(50) of 15, 31, and 28 nM, respectively, with maximal response at 10(-7) M FMLP by 5 min, while no exocytosis of AG was detected. Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton by latrunculin A and cytochalasin D induced a decrease in FMLP-stimulated CD35 expression after an initial increase. Both drugs enhanced the rate and extent of FMLP-stimulated GG, SG, and AG exocytosis, while the EC(50) for FMLP was not altered. We conclude that the actin cytoskeleton controls access of neutrophil granules to the plasma membrane, thereby limiting the rate and extent of exocytosis of all granule subsets. Differential association of actin with the four granule subsets was not associated with graded exocytosis.17187173
Cellular uptake of amelogenin, and its localization to CD63, and Lamp1-positive vesicles.
Shapiro J L, Wen X, Okamoto C T, Wang H J, Lyngstadaas S P, Goldberg M, Snead M L, Paine M L
Cellular and molecular life sciences : CMLS
Proteins of the developing enamel matrix include amelogenin, ameloblastin and enamelin. Of these three proteins amelogenin predominates. Protein-protein interactions are likely to occur at the ameloblast Tomes' processes between membrane-bound proteins and secreted enamel matrix proteins. Such protein-protein interactions could be associated with cell signaling or endocytosis. CD63 and Lamp1 are ubiquitously expressed, are lysosomal integral membrane proteins, and localize to the plasma membrane. CD63 and Lamp1 interact with amelogenin in vitro. In this study our objective was to study the molecular events of intercellular trafficking of an exogenous source of amelogenin, and related this movement to the spatiotemporal expression of CD63 and Lamp1 using various cell lineages. Exogenously added amelogenin moves rapidly into the cell into established Lamp1-positive vesicles that subsequently localize to the perinuclear region. These data indicate a possible mechanism by which amelogenin, or degraded amelogenin peptides, are removed from the extracellular matrix during enamel formation and maturation.17177968
Diclofenac induces basophil degranulation without increasing CD63 expression in sensitive patients.
Malbrán A, Yeyati E, Rey G L, Galassi N
Clinical and experimental immunology
Diclofenac (Dc) induces an IgE-independent basophil (Ba) degranulation in susceptible individuals. CD63 Ba expression is utilized as an in vitro test for diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity. We tested the ability of Dc to induce CD63 Ba expression by flow cytometry (BAT) and Ba degranulation using light microscopy (HBDT) in patients sensitive to Dc. We studied 14 patients with diclofenac hypersensitivity, also two patients sensitive to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Dp), and 12 normal controls. HBDT was performed by mononuclear cells toluidine blue staining. BAT determined CD63 expression in antiCD63/anti-IgE/anti-CD45-labelled whole blood. In each case, the percentage of activated Ba post-stimulation with 1 and 10 microg/ml Dc was determined. Positive controls included N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) peptide-induced activation. IgE-mediated Ba activation was induced with a Dp allergenic extract. With Dc 1 microg/ml, mean HBDT in Dc-susceptible individuals was 33.62 +/- 18.35% and 8.49 +/- 4.79% in controls (P = 0.0001). Mean BAT was 2.04 +/- 1.68% and 1.93 +/- 1.40% in controls (P = 0.8). Ba preincubation with Dc did not affect fMLP-induced CD63 expression, neither in Dc-sensitive individuals (P = 0.8) (n = 4) nor in subjects without Dc hypersensitivity (P = 0.25) (n = 4). Ba from the two patients sensitive both to Dc and Dp responded to Dp but not to Dc by BAT: Dc, 1.99 +/- 0.78%; Dp: 60.87 +/- 9.28%; but showed degranulation by HBDT: Dc, 30.53 +/- 1.02%, Dp: 48.78 +/- 22.17%. Dc induces Ba degranulation in sensitive patients in a way that does not induce CD63 expression and is different from IgE-mediated and fMLP-mediated degranulation. Our results suggest that CD63 expression is not a reliable diagnostic method for diclofenac allergy.17170374
A mechanistic model for paradoxical platelet activation by ligand-mimetic alphaIIb beta3 (GPIIb/IIIa) antagonists.
Bassler Nicole, Loeffler Christoph, Mangin Pierre, Yuan Yuping, Schwarz Meike, Hagemeyer Christoph E, Eisenhardt Steffen U, Ahrens Ingo, Bode Christoph, Jackson Shaun P, Peter Karlheinz
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology
Integrins are attractive therapeutic targets. Inhibition of integrin alphaIIb beta3 effectively blocks platelet aggregation. However, limitations with intravenous alphaIIb beta3 antagonists and failure of oral alphaIIb beta3 antagonists prompted doubts on the current concept of ligand-mimetic integrin blockade.
Evaluating P-selectin expression on platelets by flow cytometry, we report a mechanism of paradoxical platelet activation by ligand-mimetic alphaIIb beta3 antagonists and define three requirements: (1) Induction of ligand-bound conformation of alphaIIb beta3, (2) receptor clustering, (3) prestimulation of platelets. Conformational change is inducible by clinically used ligand-mimetic alphaIIb beta3 antagonists, RGD-peptides, and anti-LIBS antibodies. In a mechanistic experimental model, clustering is achieved by crosslinking integrins via antibodies, and preactivation is induced by low-dose ADP. Finally, we demonstrate that platelet adhesion on collagen represents an in vivo correlate of platelet prestimulation and receptor clustering, in which the presence of ligand-mimetic alphaIIb beta3 antagonists results in platelet activation as detected by P-selectin, CD63, and CD40L expression as well as by measuring Ca2+-signaling. Blockade of the ADP receptor P2Y12 by AR-C69931MX and clopidogrel inhibits alphaIIb beta3 antagonist-induced platelet activation.
These findings can explain limitations of ligand-mimetic anti-alphaIIb beta3 therapy. They describe potential benefits of concomitant ADP receptor blockade and support a shift in drug development from ligand-mimetic toward allosteric or activation-specific integrin antagonists.17167779
Role of Src-family kinases in formation and trafficking of macropinosomes.
Kasahara Kousuke, Nakayama Yuji, Sato Izumi, Ikeda Kikuko, Hoshino Masaki, Endo Takeshi, Yamaguchi Naoto
Journal of cellular physiology
Src-family kinases that localize to the cytoplasmic side of cellular membranes through lipid modification play a role in signaling events including membrane trafficking. Macropinocytosis is an endocytic process for solute uptake by large vesicles called macropinosomes. Although macropinosomes can be visualized following uptake of fluorescent macromolecules, little is known about the dynamics of macropinosomes in living cells. Here, we show that constitutive c-Src expression generates macropinosomes in a kinase-dependent manner. Live-cell imaging of GFP-tagged c-Src (Src-GFP) reveals that c-Src associates with macropinosomes via its N-terminus continuously from their generation at membrane ruffles, through their centripetal trafficking, to fusion with late endosomes and lysosomes. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of Src-GFP shows that Src-GFP is rapidly recruited to macropinosomal membranes from the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles through vesicle transport even in the presence of a protein synthesis inhibitor. Furthermore, using a HeLa cell line overexpressing inducible c-Src, we show that following stimulation with epidermal growth factor (EGF), high levels of c-Src kinase activity promote formation of macropinosomes associated with the lysosomal compartment. Unlike c-Src, Lyn and Fyn, which are palmitoylated Src kinases, only minimally induce macropinosomes, although a Lyn mutant in which the palmitoylation site is mutated efficiently induces macropinocytosis. We conclude that kinase activity of nonpalmitoylated Src kinases including c-Src may play an important role in the biogenesis and trafficking of macropinosomes.
(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.17165288
Flow cytometric basophil activation test: detection of CD63 expression as a useful aid to diagnosis of latex allergy.
Nettis Eustachio, Colanardi Maria Cristina, Dambra Porzia Pia, Capuzzimati Laura, Loria Maria Paola, Ferrannini Antonio, Vacca Angelo, Tursi Alfredo
Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology
17159336
Platelet activation and von Willebrand factor binding to platelets in newborn infants with central venous lines.
Schmugge M, Bang K W A, Blanchette V S, Albisetti M, Connolly B L, Freedman J, Rand M L
Acta haematologica
17151103
CD4 coexpression regulates DC-SIGN-mediated transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1.
Wang Jian-Hua, Janas Alicia M, Olson Wendy J, KewalRamani Vineet N, Wu Li
Journal of virology
Dendritic cells (DCs) potently stimulate the cell-cell transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). However, the mechanisms that underlie DC transmission of HIV-1 to CD4(+) T cells are not fully understood. DC-SIGN, a C-type lectin, efficiently promotes HIV-1 trans infection. DC-SIGN is expressed in monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs), macrophage subsets, activated B lymphocytes, and various mucosal tissues. MDDC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4(+) T cells involves DC-SIGN-dependent and -independent mechanisms. DC-SIGN transmission of HIV-1 depends on the donor cell type. HIV-1 Nef can upregulate DC-SIGN expression and promote DC-T-cell clustering and HIV-1 spread. Nef also downregulates CD4 expression; however, the effect of the CD4 downmodulation on DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission has not been examined. Here, we report that CD4 expression levels correlate with inefficient HIV-1 transmission by monocytic cells expressing DC-SIGN. Expression of CD4 on Raji B cells strongly impaired DC-SIGN-mediated HIV-1 transmission to T cells. By contrast, enhanced HIV-1 transmission was observed when CD4 molecules on MDDCs and DC-SIGN-CD4-expressing cell lines were blocked with specific antibodies. Coexpression of CD4 and DC-SIGN in Raji cells promoted the internalization and intracellular retention of HIV-1. Interestingly, internalized HIV-1 particles were sorted and confined to late endosomal compartments that were positive for CD63 and CD81. Furthermore, in HIV-1-infected MDDCs, significant downregulation of CD4 by Nef expression correlated with enhanced viral transmission. These results suggest that CD4, which is present at various levels in DC-SIGN-positive primary cells, is a key regulator of HIV-1 transmission.17111386
Flow-assisted quantification of in vitro activated basophils in the diagnosis of wasp venom allergy and follow-up of wasp venom immunotherapy.
Ebo D G, Hagendorens M M, Schuerwegh A J, Beirens L M-N, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Correct identification of the culprit venom is a prerequisite for specific venom immunotherapy (VIT). Despite the efficacy of VIT, issues as how to monitor treatment and when to discontinue maintenance therapy remain to be established.
To evaluate diagnostic performances of the basophil activation test (BAT) in wasp venom allergy, 80 patients with a definite history of wasp venom anaphylaxis (systemic reactors) and 14 wasp-stung asymptomatic controls (stung controls) were enrolled. Venom-induced basophil activation was analyzed flow cytometrically by double-labeling with anti-IgE and anti-CD63. Results were compared to wasp IgE levels and results of a venom skin test (VST). To establish whether the BAT constitutes a candidate marker to monitor VIT, the BAT was repeated in 22 patients on the 5th day of a build-up course and after 6 months of maintenance VIT. Whether the BAT could contribute in the decision of discontinuing VIT was assessed in a cross-sectional analysis in 30 patients receiving treatment for 3 years.
Comparison between systemic reactors and stung controls revealed a sensitivity of 86.4% and specificity of 100% for venom IgE, and sensitivity of 81.8% for VST, respectively. In contrast to stung controls, patients demonstrated dose-dependent venom-induced basophil activation. The BAT attained a sensitivity of 83.8% and specificity of 100%. At the end of the build-up course, no effect of VIT on the BAT was demonstrable. When the BAT was repeated after 6 months of treatment, submaximal stimulation of the cells demonstrated a significant decreased CD63 expression (P < 0.04). Patients having VIT for 3 years also demonstrated significantly lower venom-induced CD63 expression (P < 0.001). After 3 years, 60% of the patients had a negative BAT for submaximal stimulation of the cells whereas only 17.9% of the patients had negativation of wasp IgE.
The BAT is a reliable instrument for the diagnosis of wasp venom anaphylaxis and might constitute an instrument to monitor wasp VIT.
Copyright 2006 International Society for Analytical Cytology17109415
Preclinical biocompatibility assessment of the EVAHEART ventricular assist device: coating comparison and platelet activation.
Snyder Trevor A, Tsukui Hiroyuki, Kihara Shin'Ichiro, Akimoto Takehide, Litwak Kenneth N, Kameneva Marina V, Yamazaki Kenji, Wagner William R
Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
Thromboembolism and bleeding remain significant complications of ventricular assist device (VAD) support. Increasing the amount of biocompatibility data collected during preclinical studies can provide additional criteria to evaluate device refinements, while design changes may be implemented before entering clinical use. Twenty bovines were implanted with the EVAHEART centrifugal VAD for durations from 30 to 196 days. Titanium alloy pumps were coated with either diamond-like carbon or 2-methoxyethyloylphosphoryl choline (MPC). Activated platelets and platelet microaggregates were quantified by flow cytometry, including two new assays to quantify bovine platelets expressing CD62P and CD63. Temporally, all assays were low preoperatively, then significantly increased following VAD implantation, before declining to a lower, but still elevated level over 2-3 weeks. MPC-coated VADs produced significantly fewer activated platelets after implant trauma effects diminished. Three animals receiving no postoperative anticoagulation had similar amounts of circulating activated platelets and platelet microaggregates as animals receiving warfarin anticoagulation. Two new methods to quantify bovine activated platelets using antibodies to CD62P and CD63 were characterized and applied. These measures, along with previously described assays, were able to differentiate between two biocompatible coatings and assess effects of anticoagulation regimen in VAD preclinical testing.
(c) 2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. .17073872
Different expression of adhesion molecules and tetraspanins of monocytes of patients with atopic eczema.
Jockers J J, Novak N
Allergy
Atopic eczema (AE) and psoriasis vulgaris (Pso) represent the most frequent chronic inflammatory skin diseases, which have a high number of characteristics in common but differ in their clinical picture and immunological background. A shared feature of both AE and Pso is a high recruitment of distinct proinflammatory cells from the blood into the skin at the initiation of the disease. A multistep adhesion cascade via different adhesion receptors consisting of 'tethering' and 'rolling' mediated by selectins, alpha-integrins and beta-integrins and the 'arrest' of the cells is initiated during this process.
To evaluate the expression of adhesion molecules and tetraspanins of monocytes of patients with AE and Pso in comparison with healthy controls.
We analysed the expression of adhesion molecules and tetraspanins on monocytes freshly isolated from the peripheral blood of patients with AE (n = 40) and Pso (n = 65) during exacerbation of their disease in comparison with healthy, non-atopic controls (n = 50).
A high number of similarities between monocytes of patients with AE and patients with Pso, and disease-related differences in the expression of CD62L, CD62P, CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, CD49b, CD49d, CD49e and CD18 and the tetraspanins CD9, CD53, CD63 and CD151, which were elevated on monocytes of patients with AE could be observed.
A distinct expression pattern of adhesion molecules and tetraspanins on monocytes of patients with AE and Pso might influence the recruitment process of inflammatory precursor cells and facilitate new approaches for therapeutic strategies aimed at interrupting the very earliest steps of the fateful recruitment process.17071328
Molecular regulation and physiology of the H+,K+ -ATPases in kidney.
Codina Juan, DuBose Thomas D
Seminars in nephrology
Two H(+), K(+)-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) proteins participate in K(+) absorption and H(+) secretion in the renal medulla. Both the gastric (HKalpha(1)) and colonic (HKalpha(2)) H(+),K(+)-ATPases have been localized and characterized by a number of techniques, and are known to be highly regulated in response to acid-base and electrolyte disturbances. Both ATPases are dimers of composition alpha/beta that localize to the apical membrane and both interact with the tetraspanin protein CD63. Although CD63 interacts with the carboxy-terminus of the alpha-subunit of the colonic H(+),K(+)-ATPase, it interacts with the beta-subunit of the gastric H(+),K(+)-ATPase. Pharmacologically, both ATPases are distinct; for example, the gastric H(+),K(+)-ATPase is inhibited by Sch-28080, but the colonic H(+),K(+)-ATPase is inhibited by ouabain (a classic inhibitor of the Na(+)-pump) and is completely insensitive to Sch-28080. The alpha-subunit of the colonic H(+),K(+)-ATPase is the only subunit of the X(+),K(+)-ATPase superfamily that has 3 different splice variants that emerge by deletion or elongation of the amino-terminus. The messenger RNA and protein of one of these splice variants (HKalpha(2C)) is specifically up-regulated in newborn rats and becomes undetectable in adult rats. Therefore, HKalpha(2), in addition to its role in potassium and acid-base homeostasis, appears to play a significant role in early growth and development. Finally, because chronic hypokalemia appears to be the most potent stimulus for upregulation of HKalpha(2), we propose that the HKalpha(2) participates importantly in the maintenance of chronic metabolic alkalosis.17054945
Rhophilin-2 is targeted to late-endosomal structures of the vesicular machinery in the presence of activated RhoB.
Steuve Séverine, Devosse Thalie, Lauwers Elsa, Vanderwinden Jean-Marie, André Bruno, Courtoy Pierre J, Pirson Isabelle
Experimental cell research
Rhophilin-2 or p76(RBE), a protein whose expression is induced by the cyclic AMP pathway in thyrocytes, contains several protein-protein interaction domains including HR-1, Bro1 and PDZ domains, and is a partner of RhoB in its GTP-bound form (Eur J Biochem, 269(24): 6241-9, 2002). We here define its subcellular localization and dissect the significance of its domains. By subcellular fractionation and colocalization experiments, rhophilin-2 is recruited to subcellular organelles by activated RhoB-GTP. As for its yeast homologue, Npi3/Bro1p, the Bro1 domain of rhophilin-2 is necessary to its recruitment to the vesicular structures, which are not labeled for EEA1 nor Lamp1, but well with the late endosome marker CD63.17043215
Recruitment of CD63 to Cryptococcus neoformans phagosomes requires acidification.
Artavanis-Tsakonas Katerina, Love J Christopher, Ploegh Hidde L, Vyas Jatin M
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
The subcellular localization of the cluster of differentiation 63 (CD63) tetraspanin and its interaction with the class II MHC antigen presentation pathway were examined in the context of phagocytosis by live cell imaging, by using monomeric red fluorescent protein-tagged mouse CD63 expressed in primary bone marrow-derived cell cultures. Upon phagocytosis of Cryptococcus neoformans and polystyrene beads, CD63 was recruited selectively to C. neoformans-containing phagosomes in a MyD88-independent acidification-dependent manner. Bead-containing phagosomes, within a C. neoformans-containing cell, acidified to a lesser extent and failed to recruit CD63 to a level detectable by microscopy. CD63 recruitment to yeast phagosomes occurred independently of class II MHC and LAMP-1. These observations indicate that the composition of distinct phagosomal compartments within the same cell is determined by phagosomal cargo and may affect the outcome of antigen processing and presentation.17016855
Inhibition of integrin alphavbeta3 reduces blood-brain barrier breakdown in focal ischemia in rats.
Shimamura Norihito, Matchett Gerald, Solaroglu Ihsan, Tsubokawa Tamiji, Ohkuma Hiroki, Zhang John
Journal of neuroscience research
Ischemic stroke is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in industrialized nations. We tested the effect of postischemic treatment of cyclo-RGDfV (cRGDfV), a selective inhibitor of integrin alphavbeta3, in the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model of ischemic stroke in rats. Rats were randomly divided into three groups: sham operation (n = 13), MCAO with no treatment (n = 18), and MCAO with cRGDfV treatment (n = 28). Focal ischemia was induced with the suture occlusion method for 2 hr, and treatment was given 1 hr after reperfusion (3 hr after ischemia). All animals were sacrificed 24 hr after reperfusion. Assessment included neurological scores, infarction volumes, brain water content, Evans blue exudation, IgG exudation, histology, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting. Treatment with cRGDfV ameliorated neurological deficits, reduced brain edema, and reduced exudation of Evans blue dye and IgG, but failed to reduce infarction volumes. Western blotting showed a reduction in phosphorylation of one subset of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptors in the cRGDfV treatment group. Western blotting also demonstrated a significant reduction of fibrinogen in the cRGDfV treatment group. We conclude that poststroke treatment with cRGDfV reduces blood-brain barrier breakdown in focal ischemia, possibly through inhibition of VEGF-mediated vascular breakdown.17002715
Simultaneous exposure of several allergens has an additive effect on multisensitized basophils.
Nopp A, Johansson S G O, Lundberg M, Oman H
Allergy
Patients immunoglobulin (Ig)E-sensitized to more than one allergen in their environment often have more symptoms than mono-sensitized individuals, which indicates that the allergens may have an additive effect. In order to study if such an effect could be detected on the inflammatory, cellular level, multisensitized basophils were challenged with various dose combinations of two relevant allergens.
Basophils from patients IgE-sensitized to timothy/cat, birch/cat, timothy/mite and cat/mite were challenged with serial dilutions of different combinations of the two allergens. The basophil response was measured as CD63 expression analysed by flow cytometry.
The doses of each allergen in the pair had an additive effect resulting in a shift of the dose-response curve to higher CD63 percentages and higher CD-sens.
If a patient has IgE antibodies and thus sensitized basophils to more than one allergen, to which he is simultaneously exposed, the additive effect should be considered. Even low concentrations of IgE antibodies could be of clinical relevance in such a situation.16986719
[Four cases of pseudothrombocytopenia due to platelet cold agglutinins].
Kurata Yoshiyuki, Hayashi Satoru, Jouzaki Kiyoshi, Konishi Ichirou, Kashiwagi Hirokazu, Tomiyama Yoshiaki
[Rinshō ketsueki] The Japanese journal of clinical hematology
We report 4 cases of pseudothrombocytopenia due to platelet cold agglutinins. Case 1 was a 57 y.o. female whose platelet count was 97 x 10(3)/microl. Case 2 was a 37 y.o. male with a platelet count of 96 x 10(3)/microl. Case 3 was a 74 y.o. male with a platelet count of 28 x 10(3)/microl. Case 4 was a 62 y.o. female whose platelet count was 34 x 10(3)/microl. The platelet counts in these 4 cases were decreased and blood smears showed platelet clumping in blood drawn in a tube without anticoagulant just after withdrawal, as well as in blood drawn in a tube with anticoagulant. The platelets from these patients agglutinated at a temperature below 10 degrees C (case 1 and 4) and 24 degrees C (case 2). The immunoglobulin class of the platelet cold agglutinins in cases 1, 2 and 4 was IgM. Agglutinated platelets showed no activation marker, such as CD62P, CD63 or CD40L, on the surface of the platelets. The target antigen of cold agglutinins was GPIIb-IIIa in cases 1 and 2. We considered that the detection of platelet agglutination in blood without anticoagulant is important to diagnose pseudothrombocytopenia due to platelet cold agglutinins. Although this disease is considered to be very rare, we suspect that this disease may be misdiagnosed as pseudothrombocytopenia due to the presence of an anticoagulant, and overlooked.16918511
Comparison of basophil activation tests using CD63 or CD203c expression in patients with insect venom allergy.
Eberlein-König B, Varga R, Mempel M, Darsow U, Behrendt H, Ring J
Allergy
Flow cytometric basophil activation tests have been developed as cellular tests for in vitro diagnosis of IgE-mediated reactions. Different activation markers (CD63 or CD203c) with distinct ways of regulation have been used after stimulation with various allergens.
It was the aim of the present study to compare basophil activation tests by measuring both CD63 and CD203c upregulation in patients with insect venom allergy.
43 patients with a history of insect venom anaphylaxis were examined. A careful allergy history was taken, and skin tests and determination of specific IgE-antibodies were performed. Basophil activation tests (BAT) using CD63 or CD203c expression were done after stimulation with different concentrations of bee and wasp venom extracts. 25 healthy subjects with negative history of insect venom allergy were studied as controls.
The CD203c protocol showed a slightly higher sensitivity than the CD63 protocol (97% vs. 89%) with regard to patients' history. The magnitude of basophil response was higher with CD203c in comparison to CD63 for both insect venoms. Specificity was 100% for the CD63 protocol and 89% for the CD203c protocol with regard to controls with negative history and negative RAST.
These results support the reliability of basophil activation tests using either CD63 or CD203c as cellular tests in the in vitro diagnosis of patients with bee or wasp venom allergy with a slightly higher sensitivity for the CD203c protocol.16918509
Serum-induced basophil CD63 expression by means of a tricolour flow cytometric method for the in vitro diagnosis of chronic urticaria.
Frezzolini A, Provini A, Teofoli P, Pomponi D, De Pità O
Allergy
Functional autoantibodies against the alpha-chain of the high-affinity IgE receptor (FcepsilonRIalpha) identify a subset of patients with chronic urticaria (CU) due to autoreactivity, as assessed by an in vivo positive response to autologous serum skin test (ASST). We performed a study to standardize the serum-induced basophil activation assay by flow cytometry (FCM) using a new tricolour method, assessing the diagnostic performance of this test in discriminating between ASST+ and ASST- CU patients.
Sera of 64 CU patients (22 ASST+ CU and 42 ASST- CU) and 10 healthy subjects were tested for their ability to induce basophil CD63 expression when incubated with whole blood of both atopic (DA) and non-atopic donors (DNA). Using a triple-labelled strategy with anti-CD123, anti-HLA-DR and anti-CD63 antibodies, CD63+ basophils were identified on a selected population of CD123+ HLA-DR- cells. In 3 ASST+ CU patients who underwent cyclosporine therapy, the assay was performed before and after treatment.
The ASST+ CU sera resulted in a significant higher induction of basophil CD63 expression compared with ASST- CU and healthy donors sera; when whole blood from DA was used, sensitivity and specificity of the assay were 95.5% and 90.5% respectively. ASST+ CU serum activity was significantly decreased during cyclosporine A treatment, in parallel with clinical remission.
Chronic urticaria serum-induced CD63 expression assay performed on DA whole blood by means of our tricolour FCM method could be the most useful tool for identification of a subset of patients with autoimmune CU and may become a promising tool also for monitoring treatment efficacy.16917503
Identification of CD63 as a tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 interacting cell surface protein.
Jung Ki-Kyung, Liu Xu-Wen, Chirco Rosemarie, Fridman Rafael, Kim Hyeong-Reh Choi
The EMBO journal
This study identified CD63, a member of the tetraspanin family, as a TIMP-1 interacting protein by yeast two-hybrid screening. Immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopic analysis confirmed CD63 interactions with TIMP-1, integrin beta1, and their co-localizations on the cell surface of human breast epithelial MCF10A cells. TIMP-1 expression correlated with the level of active integrin beta1 on the cell surface independent of cell adhesion. While MCF10A cells within a three-dimensional (3D) matrigel matrix form polarized acinar-like structures, TIMP-1 overexpression disrupted breast epithelial cell polarization and inhibited caspase-mediated apoptosis in centrally located cells, necessary for the formation and maintenance of the hollow acinar-like structures. Small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated CD63 downregulation effectively reduced TIMP-1 binding to the cell surface, TIMP-1 co-localization with integrin beta1, and consequently reversed TIMP-1-mediated integrin beta1 activation, cell survival signaling and apoptosis inhibition. CD63 downregulation also restored polarization and apoptosis of TIMP-1 overexpressing MCF10A cells within a 3D-matrigel matrix. Taken together, the present study identified CD63 as a cell surface binding partner for TIMP-1, regulating cell survival and polarization via TIMP-1 modulation of tetraspanin/integrin signaling complex.16912326
Mobility of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Pr55Gag in living cells.
Gomez Candace Y, Hope Thomas J
Journal of virology
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) assembly requires the converging of thousands of structural proteins on cellular membranes to form a tightly packed immature virion. The Gag polyprotein contains all of the determinants important for viral assembly and must move around in the cell in order to form particles. This work has focused on Gag mobility in order to provide more insights into the dynamics of particle assembly. Key to these studies was the use of several fluorescently labeled Gag derivatives. We used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching as well as photoactivation to determine Gag mobility. Upon expression, Gag can be localized diffusely in the cytoplasm, associated with the plasma membrane, or in virus-like particles (VLPs). Here we show that Gag VLPs are primarily localized in the plasma membrane and do not colocalize with CD63. We have shown using full-length Gag as well as truncation mutants fused to green fluorescent protein that Gag is highly mobile in live cells when it is not assembled into VLPs. Results also showed that this mobility is highly dependent upon cholesterol. When cholesterol is depleted from cells expressing Gag, mobility is significantly decreased. Once cholesterol was replenished, Gag mobility returned to wild-type levels. Taken together, results from these mobility studies suggest that Gag is highly mobile and that as the assembly process proceeds, mobility decreases. These studies also suggest that Gag assembly must occur in cholesterol-rich domains in the plasma membrane.16908530
Syntenin-1 is a new component of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains: mechanisms and consequences of the interaction of syntenin-1 with CD63.
Latysheva Nadya, Muratov Gairat, Rajesh Sundaresan, Padgett Matthew, Hotchin Neil A, Overduin Michael, Berditchevski Fedor
Molecular and cellular biology
Tetraspanins are clustered in specific microdomains (named tetraspanin-enriched microdomains, or TERM) in the plasma membrane and regulate the functions of associated transmembrane receptors, including integrins and receptor tyrosine kinases. We have identified syntenin-1, a PDZ domain-containing protein, as a new component of TERM and show that syntenin-1 specifically interacts with the tetraspanin CD63. Detailed biochemical and heteronuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) studies have demonstrated that the interaction is mediated by the C-terminal cytoplasmic region of the tetraspanin and the PDZ domains of syntenin-1. Upon interaction, NMR chemical shift perturbations were predominantly localized to residues around the binding pocket of PDZ1, indicating a specific mode of recognition of the cytoplasmic tail of CD63. In addition, the C terminus of syntenin-1 has a stabilizing role in the CD63-syntenin-1 association, as deletion of the last 17 amino acids abolished the interaction. The CD63-syntenin-1 complex is abundant on the plasma membrane, and the elevated expression of the wild-type syntenin-1 slows down constitutive internalization of the tetraspanin. Furthermore, internalization of CD63 was completely blocked in cells expressing a syntenin-1 mutant lacking the first 100 amino acids. Previous results have shown that CD63 is internalized via AP-2-dependent mechanisms. Hence, our data indicate that syntenin-1 can counteract the AP-2-dependent internalization and identify this tandem PDZ protein as a new regulator of endocytosis.16881566
Coriander anaphylaxis in a spice grinder with undetected occupational allergy.
Ebo D G, Bridts C H, Mertens M H, Stevens W J
Acta clinica Belgica
Anaphylaxis after ingestion of spices as a result from occupational sensitization remains anecdotal. We describe a patient, working in a spice factory, with anaphylaxis from coriander in a meal. He also demonstrated urticaria, angio-edema, rhinoconjunctivitis and bronchospasm during handling coriander and fenugreek.
To determine the mechanism of the anaphylactic reaction and to evaluate cross-reactivity between both botanically unrelated spices.
Investigations comprised quantification of total and specific IgE by Immuno-CAP FEIA, skin testing, basophil activation experiments by flow-assisted determination of CD63 expression in the patient and 3 healthy controls. Immuno-CAP inhibition experiments were applied to investigate cross-reactivity.
Specific IgE, skin tests and basophil activation tests were clearly positive in the patient, whereas they remained negative in controls. No cross-reactivity between fenugreek and coriander was demonstrable by inhibition experiments.
The clinical manifestations in temporal relationship to ingestion of coriander and handling of coriander and/or fenugreek, the positive specific IgE results, skin tests and basophil activation assays support the diagnosis of allergy to both spices. History suggests sensitization by occupational exposure.16874023
The dynamics of autophagy visualized in live cells: from autophagosome formation to fusion with endo/lysosomes.
Bampton Edward T W, Goemans Christoph G, Niranjan Dhevahi, Mizushima Noboru, Tolkovsky Aviva M
Autophagy
Autophagy has been implicated in a range of disorders and hence is of major interest. However, imaging autophagy in real time has been hampered by lack of suitable markers. We have compared the potential of monodansylcadaverine, widely used as an autophagosomal marker, and the Atg8 homologue LC3, to follow autophagy by fluorescence microscopy whilst labelling late endosomes and lysosomes simultaneously using EGFP-CD63. Monodansylcadaverine labelled only acidic CD63-positive compartments in response to a range of autophagic inducers in various live or post-fixed cells, staining being identical in atg5(+/+) and atg5(-/-) MEFs in which autophagosome formation is disabled. Monodansylcadaverine staining was essentially indistinguishable from that of LysoTracker Red, LAMP-1 or LAMP-2. In contrast, 60-90% of EGFP-LC3-positive punctate organelles did not colocalise with LAMP-1/LAMP-2/CD63 and were monodansylcadaverine-negative while EGFP-LC3 puncta that did colocalise with LAMP-1/LAMP-2/CD63 were also monodansylcadaverine-positive. Hence monodansylcadaverine is no different from other markers of acidic compartments and it cannot be used to follow autophagosome formation. In contrast, fusion of mRFP-LC3-labelled autophagosomes with EGFP-CD63-positive endosomes and lysosomes and sequestration of dsRed-labelled mitochondria by EGFP-LC3- and EGFP-CD63-positive compartments could be visualized in real time. Moreover, transition of EGFP-LC3-I (45 kDa) to EGFP-LC3-II (43 kDa)-traced by immunoblotting and verified by [(3)H]ethanolamine labelling-revealed novel insights into the dynamics of autophagosome homeostasis, including the rapid activation of autophagy by the apoptotic inducer staurosporine prior to apoptosis proper. Use of fluorescent LC3 and a counter-fluorescent endosomal/lysosomal protein clearly allows the entire autophagic process to be followed by live cell imaging with high fidelity.16868799
Activated platelets as a possible early marker to predict clinical efficacy of leukocytapheresis in severe ulcerative colitis patients.
Fukunaga Ken, Fukuda Yoshihiro, Yokoyama Yoko, Ohnishi Kunio, Kusaka Takeshi, Kosaka Tadashi, Hida Nobuyuki, Ohda Yoshio, Miwa Hiroto, Matsumoto Takayuki
Journal of gastroenterology
Leukocytapheresis (LCAP) is an effective adjunct for patients with active ulcerative colitis (UC). Because LCAP may have the potential to remove and modulate not only leukocytes but also platelets, we evaluated the correlation between activated platelets and the therapeutic response to LCAP.
Fourteen patients with severe UC received weekly LCAP for 5 consecutive weeks. Their average clinical activity index (CAI) and endoscopic index (EI) were 9.6 +/- 3.4 and 10.9 +/- 1.0, respectively. Their peripheral blood was sampled before and after every LCAP and stained with fluorescent antibodies to the activation-dependent surface antigens of platelets (CD63, CD62-P) prior to flow cytometry. Endoscopic evaluations were performed after the last LCAP.
Clinical remission (CAI < 4) was induced in 50% of the patients (7/14) after 5 weeks, and there were no significant differences observed in clinical background between the responder group (RG) and the nonresponder group (NG). In the RG, the populations of CD63(+) (P < 0.03) and CD62-P(+) (P < 0.05) platelets were significantly decreased after the first LCAP, and their reduction ratio decreased gradually with repeated LCAP. A significant improvement of the EI score, especially mucosal damage, was achieved in RG (P < 0.04) but not in NG.
These results indicate that the therapeutic responses to LCAP were reflected in modulations of population and/or platelet functions, especially after the first session. The decrease of such activated platelets immediately after the first LCAP may be an early marker for predicting the response in patients with severe UC.16867982
Gamma-adaptin, a novel ubiquitin-interacting adaptor, and Nedd4 ubiquitin ligase control hepatitis B virus maturation.
Rost Martina, Mann Sylvia, Lambert Carsten, Döring Tatjana, Thomé Nicole, Prange Reinhild
The Journal of biological chemistry
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) budding from infected cells is a tightly regulated process that requires both core and envelope structures. Here we report that HBV uses cellular gamma2-adaptin and Nedd4, possibly in conjunction with ubiquitin, to coordinate its assembly and release. In search of interaction partners of the viral L envelope protein, we previously discovered gamma2-adaptin, a putative endosomal sorting and trafficking adaptor of the adaptor protein complex family. We now demonstrate that the viral core interacts with the same gamma2-adaptor and that disruption of the HBV/gamma2-adaptin interactions inhibits virus production. Mutational analyses revealed a hitherto unknown ubiquitin-binding activity of gamma2-adaptin, specified by a ubiquitin-interacting motif, which contributes to its interaction with core. For core, the lysine residue at position 96, a potential target for ubiquitination, was identified to be essential for both gamma2-adaptin-recognition and virus production. The participation of the cellular ubiquitin system in HBV assembly was further suggested by our finding that core interacts with the endosomal ubiquitin ligase Nedd4, partly via its late domain-like PPAY sequence. Overexpression of a catalytically inactive Nedd4 mutant diminished HBV egress, indicating that protein ubiquitination is functionally involved in virus production. Additional evidence for a link of HBV assembly to the endosomal machinery was provided by immunolabeling studies that demonstrated colocalization of core and L with gamma2-adaptin in compartments positive for the late endosomal marker CD63. Together, these data indicate that an enveloped DNA virus exploits a new ubiquitin receptor together with endosomal pathway functions for egress from hepatocytes.16867045
Flow-assisted diagnostic management of anaphylaxis from rocuronium bromide.
Ebo D G, Bridts C H, Hagendorens M M, Mertens C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Allergy
Diagnosis of anaphylaxis from neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) is not always straightforward.
To assess flow cytometric analysis of activated basophils (BAT) as a diagnostic instrument in anaphylaxis from rocuronium. To investigate whether the technique might help to identify cross-reactive and safe alternative compounds.
For validation of the BAT, 14 patients with perioperative anaphylaxis demonstrating a positive skin test (ST) for rocuronium and eight individuals that tolerated rocuronium and a negative ST for this drug were enrolled. To confirm specificity of the BAT, five patients that tolerated atracurium or cisatracurium with a negative ST for rocuronium were tested. Basophil activation with rocuronium, vecuronium, atracurium, cisatracurium and suxamethonium was analysed flow cytometrically by labelling with anti-CD123/anti-HLADR/anti-CD63.
Sensitivity of BAT for rocuronium was 91.7% and specificity 100%. However, in two patients the BAT was lost as a diagnostic tool, as their cells were nonresponsive to positive control stimulation and allergen. Seven from the 12 responsive patients also demonstrated a clear basophilic activation for vecuronium. Moreover, according to ST and/or BAT cross-reactivity between rocuronium and vecuronium was suspected in 10/14 patients. Except one patient, all patients had negative BAT and ST investigations for atracurium and cisatracurium. Currently, five patients tolerated administration of cisatracurium. All control individuals demonstrated negative ST and BAT for all tested NMBA.
The BAT constitutes a reliable instrument to diagnose anaphylaxis from rocuronium. The technique also allows quick and simultaneous testing of different potential cross-reactive NMBA and to tailor a safe alternative.16860665
3. Protein-protein interactions of the developing enamel matrix.
Bartlett John D, Ganss Bernhard, Goldberg Michel, Moradian-Oldak Janet, Paine Michael L, Snead Malcolm L, Wen Xin, White Shane N, Zhou Yan L
Current topics in developmental biology
Extracellular matrix proteins control the formation of the inorganic component of hard tissues including bone, dentin, and enamel. The structural proteins expressed primarily in the enamel matrix are amelogenin, ameloblastin, enamelin, and amelotin. Other proteins, like biglycan, are also present in the enamel matrix as well as in other mineralizing and nonmineralizing tissues of mammals. In addition, the presence of sulfated enamel proteins, and "tuft" proteins has been examined and discussed in relation to enamel formation. The structural proteins of the enamel matrix must have specific protein-protein interactions to produce a matrix capable of directing the highly ordered structure of the enamel crystallites. Protein-protein interactions are also likely to occur between the secreted enamel proteins and the plasma membrane of the enamel producing cells, the ameloblasts. Such protein-protein interactions are hypothesized to influence the secretion of enamel proteins, establish short-term order of the forming matrix, and to mediate feedback signals to the transcriptional machinery of these cells. Membrane-bound proteins identified in ameloblasts, and which interact with the structural enamel proteins, include Cd63 (cluster of differentiation 63 antigen), annexin A2 (Anxa2), and lysosomal-associated glycoprotein 1 (Lamp1). These and related data help explain the molecular and cellular mechanisms responsible for the removal of the organic enamel matrix during the events of enamel mineralization, and how the enamel matrix influences its own fate through signaling initiated at the cell surface. The knowledge gained from enamel developmental studies may lead to better dental and nondental materials, or materials inspired by Nature. These data will be critical to scientists, engineers, and dentists in their pursuits to regenerate an entire tooth. For tooth regeneration to become a reality, the protein-protein interactions involving the key dental proteins must be identified and understood. The scope of this review is to discuss the current understanding of protein-protein interactions of the developing enamel matrix, and relate this knowledge to enamel biomineralization.16856976
Clopidogrel increases expression of chemokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in patients with coronary artery disease: results of a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
Waehre T, Damås J K, Pedersen T M, Gullestad L, Yndestad A, Andreassen A K, Frøland S S, Semb A G, Hansteen V, Gjertsen E, Ueland T, Brosstad F, Solum N O, Aukrust P
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
Chemokines and platelet activation are both important in atherogenesis. Platelet inhibitors are widely used in coronary artery disease (CAD), and we hypothesized that the platelet inhibitor clopidogrel could modify chemokines in CAD patients.
We sought to investigate the effect of clopidogrel on the expression of chemokines and chemokine receptors in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) in CAD patients. Patients/methods: Thirty-seven patients with stable angina were randomized to clopidogrel (n = 18) or placebo (n = 19). PBMC, blood platelets and plasma were collected at baseline and after 7-10 days in the patients, and in 10 healthy controls. mRNA levels of chemokines and chemokine receptors in PBMC were analyzed by ribonuclease protection assays and real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Platelet activation was studied by flow cytometry.
(i) At baseline, the gene expression of the regulated on activation normally T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) chemokines and macrophage inflammatory peptide (MIP)-1beta in PBMC, the expression of CD62P and CD63 on platelets and the levels of platelet-derived microparticles (PMP) were elevated in angina patients comparing healthy controls; (ii) markers of platelet activation were either reduced (CD63) or unchanged (CD62P, PMP, beta-thromboglobulin) during clopidogrel therapy; (iii) in contrast, clopidogrel significantly up-regulated the gene expression of RANTES and MIP-1beta in PBMC, while no changes were found in the placebo group; (iv) a stable adenosine 5'-diphosphate metabolite attenuated the release of MIP-1beta, but not of RANTES, from activated PBMC in vitro.
Even if we do not argue against a beneficial role for clopidogrel in CAD, our findings may suggest potential inflammatory effects of clopidogrel in CAD.16840028
Granule targeting of soluble tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor expressed during granulopoietic maturation in murine bone marrow cells.
Gao Ying, Tapper Hans, Calafat Jero, Olsson Inge, Hansson Markus
European cytokine network
In this experiment, we explored the potential of secretory lysosomes of hematopoietic cells to act as vehicles for immunomodulatory protein delivery at an inflammation site. We investigated whether exogenous soluble TNF-receptor 1 (sTNFR1) could be expressed in primary hematopoietic progenitor cells and become targeted for storage and secretion during granulopoietic differentiation. An sTNFR1 construct with a transmembrane domain (tm) and a cytosol sorting signal (Y) taken from CD63, was retrovirally transduced to lineage-negative murine hematopoietic bone marrow stem/progenitor cells. This process was followed by cytokine-driven granulopoietic maturation. The sTNFR1-tm-Y was found to be synthesized in precursor cells and to persist in mature granulocytes and monocytes/macrophages. Immunofluorescence-localization studies showed a granule pattern of sTNFR1-tm-Y in both precursor and mature granulocytes and secretion to phagosomes after ingestion of bacteria. Immunoelectron microscopy revealed co-localization between the sTNFR1-tm-Y and the primary (azurophil) granule marker myeloperoxidase. Collectively, our results demonstrated granule targeting, storage, and secretion of exogenous sTNFR1-tm-Y constitutively expressed during normal granulopoietic differentiation. These findings support the concept of using storage organelles of circulating hematopoietic cells as vehicles for targeting sites of inflammation with immunoregulatory agents.16837789
Diagnostic tests based on human basophils: potentials, pitfalls and perspectives.
Kleine-Tebbe Jörg, Erdmann Stephan, Knol Edward F, MacGlashan Donald W, Poulsen Lars K, Gibbs Bernhard F
International archives of allergy and immunology
Human basophils are important tools for studying immediate-type hypersensitivity reactions since they release a variety of mediators (e.g., histamine, leukotriene C4, IL-4 and IL-13) following allergen triggering. Several diagnostic tools have been introduced that measure either leukotriene production or the upregulation of surface markers (CD63 and CD203c) from these cells after antigen stimulation. However, a broad variability in basophil activity exists between different basophil donors and different antigens within one donor. This manifests itself in terms of their reactivity (maximum secretory response), based on the intracellular signaling of the basophils studied, and in terms of their sensitivity. The latter is governed by the number of IgE receptors per basophil, the ratio of antigen-specific IgE to total IgE, and by the number of cell surface antigen-specific IgE molecules for half-maximal responses, termed 'intrinsic sensitivity'. These variables give rise to shifts in the dose-response curves which, in a diagnostic setting where only a single antigen concentration is employed, may produce false-negative data. Thus, in order to meaningfully utilize the current basophil activation tests for diagnostic purposes, each allergen should be pre-evaluated separately in order to determine a suitable stimulation range. Additionally, anti-IgE or anti-FcepsilonRIalpha antibodies should serve as positive controls, bearing in mind that 10-20% of basophil donors are not responsive to IgE-mediated stimulation. Diagnostic studies using CD63 or CD203c in hymenoptera, food and drug allergy are critically discussed. Basophil-based tests are indicated for allergy testing in selected cases but should only be performed by experienced laboratories.
Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.16837549
BLOC-1 interacts with BLOC-2 and the AP-3 complex to facilitate protein trafficking on endosomes.
Di Pietro Santiago M, Falcón-Pérez Juan M, Tenza Danièle, Setty Subba R G, Marks Michael S, Raposo Graça, Dell'Angelica Esteban C
Molecular biology of the cell
The adaptor protein (AP)-3 complex is a component of the cellular machinery that controls protein sorting from endosomes to lysosomes and specialized related organelles such as melanosomes. Mutations in an AP-3 subunit underlie a form of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS), a disorder characterized by abnormalities in lysosome-related organelles. HPS in humans can also be caused by mutations in genes encoding subunits of three complexes of unclear function, named biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex (BLOC)-1, -2, and -3. Here, we report that BLOC-1 interacts physically and functionally with AP-3 to facilitate the trafficking of a known AP-3 cargo, CD63, and of tyrosinase-related protein 1 (Tyrp1), a melanosomal membrane protein previously thought to traffic only independently of AP-3. BLOC-1 also interacts with BLOC-2 to facilitate Tyrp1 trafficking by a mechanism apparently independent of AP-3 function. Both BLOC-1 and -2 localize mainly to early endosome-associated tubules as determined by immunoelectron microscopy. These findings support the idea that BLOC-1 and -2 represent hitherto unknown components of the endosomal protein trafficking machinery.16801084
1-Deamino (8-D-arginine) vasopressin infusion partially corrects platelet deposition on subendothelium in Bernard-Soulier syndrome: the role of factor VIII.
Lozano M, Escolar G, Bellucci S, Monteagudo J, Pico M, Ordinas A, Caen J P
Platelets
The mechanism of the transient beneficial effect of 1-deamino(8-D-arginine) vasopressin (dDAVP) infusion in the hemostasis of some BSS patients is not fully understood. We have studied the effect of dDAVP infusion in a BSS patient using an ex vivo perfusion system. Additional coagulation and flow cytometry studies were also performed. Prolonged bleeding time (> 30 min) was not affected by dDAVP infusion. However, perfusion experiments performed with low molecular weight heparin anticoagulated blood (which permits the study of fibrin deposition on perfused subendothelium) showed a significant increase in platelet deposition (6.2% before dDAVP infusion; 20.3% after) and fibrin formation. dDAVP infusion also caused an increase in prothrombin consumption compared with base line values (33 vs 46%). Flow cytometry studies of the patients platelets showed no changes in binding of monoclonal antibodies against CD41, CD36, CD62P or CD63. The increase in thrombus formation observed in perfusions may be dependent on FVIII since it could be reproduced by adding purified free or von Willebrand factor (vWf)-associated FVIII to the patient's blood in vitro. The shortening effect of dDAVP on bleeding time observed in some Bernard-Soulier syndrome patients might be related to an increase in factor FVIII levels induced by dDAVP infusion.16793673
PMA induces platelet activation of specific antigens (CD62/CD63) in GpIIb-IIIa deficient platelets from Glanzmann's thrombasthenia.
Baudouin-Brignole F, Bayle J, Goguel A, Philip P J
Platelets
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (GT) is a hereditary platelet disorder resulting from a quantitative or qualitative deficiency of the major platelet membrane complex GPIIb-IIIa (CD41) required for platelet aggregation. We investigated by flow cytometry, the expression of CD41, fibrinogen, and of two platelet activation-related antigens, CD62 and CD63, (i) before and after activation of platelets by PMA, and (ii) on the surface and within the cytoplasm of resting platelets, after permeabilization by saponin. Platelets from a series of normal subjects and from nine members of two GT families, were reacted with FITC-conjugated antibodies and analyzed on a flow cytometer. Fluorescence intensities measured on normal and GT platelets were quantified by using calibrated beads. Results showed lack of both GPIIb-IIIa and fibrinogen, on the platelet surface and also within the cytoplasm in five of these GT patients, whereas GPIIb-IIIa and fibrinogen remained normal in the four other cases. However, CD62 and CD63 antigenic levels were found within normal range for all members of these families, after PMA stimulation and also after platelet permeabilization. This work therefore showed that the lack of CD41 in GT, which causes strong disturbance of platelet aggregation, may not be associated with the deficiency of activation pathways.16792754
Significant correlation between the CD63 assay and the histamine release assay in chronic urticaria.
Szegedi A, Irinyi B, Gál M, Hunyadi J, Dankó K, Kiss E, Sipka S, Szegedi G, Gyimesi E
The British journal of dermatology
Antibodies directed to the alpha subunit of the high affinity IgE receptor and the IgE molecule are proposed to be of pathogenetic relevance in a group of patients with chronic urticaria (CU). The diagnosis of autoimmune chronic urticaria (ACU) is difficult; the autologous serum skin test (ASST) seems to be a useful screening test, but reliable, additional confirmatory methods are needed.
To assess the diagnostic value of a modified serum-induced basophil activation test, the CD63 expression assay, in the diagnosis of ACU by comparing the results of the CD63 assay with the results of the histamine release (HR) test, the ASST and serum levels of soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L).
Using basophils from an atopic (DA) and a nonatopic (DNA) donor the activity of sera of 72 patients with CU were measured in HR assay by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and in CD63 expression assay by flow cytometry. An ASST was carried out in all patients; in 30 of the 72 patients sCD40L was detected and correlations were derived between the different assays. Sera of 20 normal controls and 26 patients with systemic autoimmune diseases were also tested in the HR assay and in the CD63 expression assay.
Histamine-releasing activity was detected in the sera of 51% (DA) and 32% (DNA) of CU patients and 57% (DA) and 28% (DNA) of sera upregulated CD63 expression on the surface of basophils from the different donors. There was a significant correlation between the HR and the CD63 assays carried out on both donors, but the ASST showed a strong correlation with the HR assay only for basophils from the DA. The serum level of sCD40L was significantly higher in patients with CU compared with controls, but the difference between the autoimmune and the nonautoimmune groups was not significant.
The CD63 expression assay seems to be a reliable functional test in the diagnosis of ACU, particularly if highly sensitive donor basophils are used, but the determination of the sCD40L serum level was not sufficient to differentiate between the autoimmune and the nonautoimmune patient groups.16792593
Predicting side-effects in venom immunotherapy by basophil activation?
Eberlein-König B, Schmidt-Leidescher C, Behrendt H, Ring J
Allergy
16785523
Follicular dendritic cells are related to bone marrow stromal cell progenitors and to myofibroblasts.
Muñoz-Fernández Raquel, Blanco Francisco Javier, Frecha Cecilia, Martín Francisco, Kimatrai Maria, Abadía-Molina Ana Clara, García-Pacheco José Marcos, Olivares Enrique G
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are involved in the presentation of native Ags to B cells during the secondary immune response. Some authors consider FDC to be hemopoietic cells, whereas others believe them to be mesenchymal cells. The low proportion of FDC in the lymphoid follicle, together with technical difficulties in their isolation, make these cells difficult to study. We show that Fibroblast Medium can be used successfully to isolate and maintain FDC lines. In this culture medium, we obtained 18 FDC lines from human tonsils, which proliferated for as long as 18 wk and showed a stable Ag phenotype as detected by flow cytometry and RT-PCR. FDC lines were CD45-negative and expressed Ags associated to FDC (CD21, CD23, CD35, CD40, CD73, BAFF, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1) and Ags specific for FDC (DRC-1, CNA.42, and HJ2). These cell lines were also able to bind B cells and secrete CXCL13, functional activities characteristic of FDC. Nevertheless, the additional expression of STRO-1, together with CD10, CD13, CD29, CD34, CD63, CD73, CD90, ICAM-1, VCAM-1, HLA-DR, alkaline phosphatase, and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SM actin) indicated that FDC are closely related to bone marrow stromal cell progenitors. The expression of alpha-SM actin also relates FDC with myofibroblasts. Like myofibroblasts, FDC lines expressed stress fibers containing alpha-SM actin and were able to contract collagen gels under the effect of TGFbeta1 and platelet-derived growth factor. These findings suggest that FDC are a specialized form of myofibroblast and derive from bone marrow stromal cell progenitors.16776678
Evidence of in vivo basophil activation in chronic idiopathic urticaria.
Vasagar K, Vonakis B M, Gober L M, Viksman A, Gibbons S P, Saini S S
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Approximately 40% of chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) subjects have autoantibodies to either FcepsilonRIalpha or IgE. The effect of such autoantibodies on circulating basophil activation status is unknown.
The expression of cell surface activation markers on basophils from CIU, non-allergic, and allergic subjects were compared. Further, the relationship between marker expression and serum factors reported in CIU, such as histamine-releasing activity (HRA) and immunoreactivity to FcepsilonRIalpha were examined.
Peripheral blood was obtained from CIU, allergic, and non-allergic donors and fractionated by density gradients. Enriched basophils (1-12%) were analysed by flow cytometry for expression of activation markers including CD63, CD69, and CD203c. Dilutions of serum (5-50%) were analysed for HRA on basophils from a normal donor. Serum was tested for immunoreactivity by western blotting to a standard cell lysate prepared from an RBL-SX38 cell line transfected with human FcepsilonRIalpha.
CIU subjects (n=9) and allergic subjects (n=8) exhibited enhanced expression of CD63 and CD69, as compared with non-allergic subjects (n=7); however, no difference was seen among groups for CD203c expression. Five CIU and two non-allergic subjects had evidence of significant serum HRA (>20%), whereas two CIU, two allergic, and three non-allergic subjects had evidence of serum immunoreactivity to FcepsilonRIalpha. Serum HRA and serum immunoreactivity to FcepsilonRIalpha were not associated with enhanced surface marker expression.
Basophil activation marker expression is increased in CIU subjects and is not associated with serum factors. In addition, serum HRA and FcepsilonRIalpha immunoreactivity are not unique to CIU, or related to enhanced circulating basophil marker expression.16775572
Effect of recombinant activated protein C and low-dose heparin on neutrophil-endothelial cell interactions in septic shock.
Kirschenbaum Linda A, Lopez Wilma Correa, Ohrum Patricia, Tsen Anita, Khazin John, Astiz Mark E
Critical care medicine
To examine the effects of recombinant activated protein C (rhAPC) and low-dose heparin on neutrophil-platelet-endothelial cell interactions in septic shock.
Controlled experiments using phase contrast microscopy to study neutrophil, platelet, and endothelial cell interactions in flowing cell suspensions under simulated physiologic conditions.
University research laboratory.
Adult patients with septic shock and normal volunteers.
Neutrophils and platelets removed from control subjects were stimulated with plasma and serum from 21 patients in septic shock and perfused over endothelial cells. Activated protein C, low-dose heparin, and low-dose heparin with rhAPC were added to cells suspended in septic plasma. Neutrophil rolling velocity and the number of neutrophils adherent to endothelial cells and in aggregates were determined. Flow cytometric analysis of CD11b/CD63 cells was used to identify platelet-neutrophil aggregates.
Activated protein C significantly decreased neutrophil adhesion and aggregation and increased rolling velocity in cells stimulated with both septic serum and septic plasma. Significant decreases in platelet-neutrophil aggregates induced by septic plasma were also observed. Low-dose heparin alone had no effects on these variables. The addition of low-dose heparin to cells suspended in septic plasma and rhAPC attenuated the benefits observed with rhAPC alone in each of these variables.
These data suggest that the in vitro addition of rhAPC decreases sepsis-induced interactions between isolated platelets, neutrophils, and endothelial cells. Low-dose heparin attenuates the benefits observed with rhAPC. The changes in neutrophil-endothelial cell interactions demonstrated with rhAPC may play a role in preserving microvascular patency in patients with septic shock.16775336
Recombinant extracellular domains of tetraspanin proteins are potent inhibitors of the infection of macrophages by human immunodeficiency virus type 1.
Ho Siu-Hong, Martin Francine, Higginbottom Adrian, Partridge Lynda J, Parthasarathy Varadarajan, Moseley Gregory W, Lopez Peter, Cheng-Mayer Cecilia, Monk Peter N
Journal of virology
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection of human macrophages can be inhibited by antibodies which bind to the tetraspanin protein CD63, but not by antibodies that bind to other members of the tetraspanin family. This inhibitory response was limited to CCR5 (R5)-tropic virus and was only observed using macrophages, but not T cells. Here, we show that recombinant soluble forms of the large extracellular domain (EC2) of human tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD81, and CD151 produced as fusion proteins with glutathione S-transferase (GST) can all potently and completely inhibit R5 HIV-1 infection of macrophages with 50% inhibitory concentration values of 0.11 to 1.2 nM. Infection of peripheral blood mononuclear cells could also be partly inhibited, although higher concentrations of EC2 proteins were required. Inhibition was largely coreceptor independent, as macrophage infections by virions pseudotyped with CXCR4 (X4)-tropic HIV-1 or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)-G glycoproteins were also inhibited, but was time dependent, since addition prior to or during, but not after, virus inoculation resulted in potent inhibition. Incubation with tetraspanins did not decrease CD4 or HIV-1 coreceptor expression but did block virion uptake. Colocalization of fluorescently labeled tetraspanin EC2 proteins and HIV-1 virions within, and with CD4 and CXCR4 at the cell surfaces of, macrophages could be detected, and internalized tetraspanin EC2 proteins were directed to vesicular compartments that contained internalized dextran and transferrin. Collectively, the data suggest that the mechanism of inhibition of HIV-1 infection by tetraspanins is at the step of virus entry, perhaps via interference with binding and/or the formation of CD4-coreceptor complexes within microdomains that are required for membrane fusion events.16772435
Red grape juice polyphenols alter cholesterol homeostasis and increase LDL-receptor activity in human cells in vitro.
Dávalos Alberto, Fernández-Hernando Carlos, Cerrato Francisca, Martínez-Botas Javier, Gómez-Coronado Diego, Gómez-Cordovés Carmen, Lasunción Miguel A
The Journal of nutrition
Red grape juice (RGJ) polyphenols have been shown to reduce circulating levels of LDL cholesterol and to increase LDL receptor activity. To explore the effect of RGJ-derived polyphenols on intracellular cholesterol homeostasis, human hepatocarcinoma HepG2 and promyelocytic HL-60 cell lines were incubated in serum-free medium, with or without LDL, in the presence or absence of RGJ. In the presence of LDL, RGJ increased both the activity and cell surface expression of the LDL receptor, and increased the cell total cholesterol content. In cells exposed to LDL, RGJ also increased levels of the active form of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 and mRNA expression of the LDL receptor and hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase. In contrast, RGJ caused a marked reduction in the expression of CYP7A1, apolipoprotein B, ABCA1, and ABCG5. Experiments using the acyl-CoA cholesterol acyltransferase inhibitor S-58035 indicated that no measurable free cholesterol from endocytosed LDL reaches the endoplasmic reticulum in cells treated with RGJ. Finally, fluorescence microscopy revealed that in RGJ-treated cells, DiI-labeled LDL did not colocalize with CD63, a protein localized at steady state in the internal vesicles of late endosomes. These results indicate that RGJ polyphenols disrupt or delay LDL trafficking through the endocytic pathway, thus preventing LDL cholesterol from exerting regulatory effects on intracellular lipid homeostasis.16771852
Chemokine receptor expression and modulation by Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens on mononuclear cells from human lymphoid tissues.
Arias Mauricio A, Pantoja Adelis E, Jaramillo Gabriela, Paris Sara C, Shattock Robin J, García Luis F, Griffin George E
Immunology
Chemokine receptor switching on lymphoid cells is an important factor regulating migration and homing, but little is known about the expression of such molecules during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in humans. We describe CCR2, CCR5 and CCR7 expression on human cells from blood, spleen and pulmonary hilar lymph nodes (PHLN) stimulated by M. tuberculosis antigens. CCR2 was not expressed by CD3+ cells regardless of the presence of antigen, but was highly expressed on CD14+ CD63+ monocytes/macrophages. CCR2 decreased on splenic monocytes/macrophages by nearly 50% in culture, independent of antigen, but remained high in blood and PHLN. CCR5 was low in CD3+ cells and was down-regulated by M. tuberculosis antigens on blood and splenic cells but not in PHLN. CCR5 was highly expressed on monocytes/macrophages and was down-regulated by M. tuberculosis antigens at 48 hr only in blood. Less than 15% of CD3+ cells from spleen and PHLN were CCR7+, whereas nearly 40% from blood expressed this receptor on primary isolation. However, CCR7 in PHLN increased in culture, independent of antigen. Monocytes/macrophages did not express CCR7. Thus, we characterize, for the first time, chemokine receptor expression and differential modulation by M. tuberculosis antigens on human mononuclear cells from spleen, blood and PHLN. Knowledge of chemokine receptor switching in human lymphoid tissue provides novel insight into mechanisms of the immune response to M. tuberculosis with potential effects on directing cell trafficking.16769603
An inherited macrothrombocytopenic disorder with abnormal large granules.
Wu Shuyan, Wang Zhaoyue, Dai Lan, Huang Rui, Wang Xiangying, Li Suan, Bai Xia, Mao Dihua, Ruan Changgeng
Platelets
Inherited giant platelet syndromes are a heterogeneous group of rare bleeding disorders. In the current study, a patient was reported with prolonged bleeding time, thrombocytopenia and giant platelets. Both the patient's red and white cell counts were normal without morphological abnormalities. The electron microscopy of platelets showed abnormal large electron-dense granules in the cytoplasm with exocytosis being easily observed. Her fathers platelets had the same abnormalities. The expression of glycoprotein (GP)Ib, GPIIb and GPIIIa on the surface of the patient's platelets was normal, and her platelet aggregation in response to ADP and ristocetin was also normal. Immunogold probes combined to monoclonal antibodies against GPIIIa, P-selectin or CD63 could not identify any relationship between the aberrant structures and alpha granules or lysosomes of platelet. Serotonin level was normal in the platelets of the patient, indicating the electron opaque granules are not dense bodies. The morphological abnormalities of the platelets from the patient are clearly distinguishable from other hereditary giant platelet disorders. We propose that the abnormal large granules from the patient's platelets probably represent a novel inherited thrombocytopenic disorder.16735575
Mapping of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains that can function as gateways for HIV-1.
Nydegger Sascha, Khurana Sandhya, Krementsov Dimitry N, Foti Michelangelo, Thali Markus
The Journal of cell biology
Specific spatial arrangements of proteins and lipids are central to the coordination of many biological processes. Tetraspanins have been proposed to laterally organize cellular membranes via specific associations with each other and with distinct integrins. Here, we reveal the presence of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs) containing the tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD81, and CD82 at the plasma membrane. Fluorescence and immunoelectron microscopic analyses document that the surface of HeLa cells is covered by several hundred TEMs, each extending over a few hundred nanometers and containing predominantly two or more tetraspanins. Further, we reveal that the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag protein, which directs viral assembly and release, accumulates at surface TEMs together with the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein. TSG101 and VPS28, components of the mammalian ESCRT1 (endosomal sorting complex required for transport), which is part of the cellular extravesiculation machinery critical for HIV-1 budding, are also recruited to cell surface TEMs upon virus expression, suggesting that HIV-1 egress can be gated through these newly mapped microdomains.16706985
Critical role of ADP interaction with P2Y12 receptor in the maintenance of alpha(IIb)beta3 activation: association with Rap1B activation.
Kamae T, Shiraga M, Kashiwagi H, Kato H, Tadokoro S, Kurata Y, Tomiyama Y, Kanakura Y
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
Platelet integrin alpha(IIb)beta3 plays a crucial role in platelet aggregation, and the affinity of alpha(IIb)beta3 for fibrinogen is dynamically regulated. Employing modified ligand-binding assays, we analyzed the mechanism by which alpha(IIb)beta3 maintains its high-affinity state.
Washed platelets adjusted to 50 x 10(3) microL(-1) were stimulated with 0.2 U mL(-1) thrombin or 5 microm U46619 under static conditions. After the completion of alpha(IIb)beta3 activation and granule secretion, different kinds of antagonists were added to the activated platelets. The activated alpha(IIb)beta3 was then detected by fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled PAC1. The addition of 1 mum AR-C69931MX (a P2Y12 antagonist) or 1 mm A3P5P (a P2Y1 antagonist) disrupted the sustained alpha(IIb)beta3 activation by approximately 92% and approximately 38%, respectively, without inhibiting CD62P or CD63 expression. Dilution of the platelet preparation to 500 microL(-1) also disrupted the sustained alpha(IIb)beta3 activation, and the disruption by such dilution was abrogated by the addition of exogenous adenosine 5'-diphosphate (ADP) in a dose-dependent fashion. The amounts of ADP released from activated platelets determined by high-performance liquid chromatography were compatible with the amounts of exogenous ADP required for the restoration. We next examined the effects of antagonists on protein kinase C (PKC) and Rap1B activation induced by 0.2 U mL(-1) thrombin. Thrombin induced long-lasting PKC and Rap1B activation. AR-C69931MX markedly inhibited Rap1B activation without inhibiting PKC activation.
Our data indicate that the continuous interaction between released ADP and P2Y12 is critical for the maintenance of alpha(IIb)beta3 activation.16683915
P-selectin and CD63 use different mechanisms for delivery to Weibel-Palade bodies.
Harrison-Lavoie Kimberly J, Michaux Grégoire, Hewlett Lindsay, Kaur Jasber, Hannah Matthew J, Lui-Roberts Winnie W Y, Norman Keith E, Cutler Daniel F
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
The biogenesis of endothelial-specific Weibel-Palade bodies (WPB) is poorly understood, despite their key role in both haemostasis and inflammation. Biogenesis of specialized organelles of haemopoietic cells is often adaptor protein complex 3-dependent (AP-3-dependent), and AP-3 has previously been shown to play a role in the trafficking of both WPB membrane proteins, P-selectin and CD63. However, WPB are thought to form at the trans Golgi network (TGN), which is inconsistent with a role for AP-3, which operates in post-Golgi trafficking. We have therefore investigated in detail the mechanisms of delivery of these two membrane proteins to WPB. We find that P-selectin is recruited to forming WPB in the trans-Golgi by AP-3-independent mechanisms that use sorting information within both the cytoplasmic tail and the lumenal domain of the receptor. In contrast, CD63 is recruited to already-budded WPB by an AP-3-dependent route. These different mechanisms of recruitment lead to the presence of distinct immature and mature populations of WPB in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC).16680576
Novel functions of TIMPs in cell signaling.
Chirco Rosemarie, Liu Xu-Wen, Jung Ki-Kyung, Kim Hyeong-Reh Choi
Cancer metastasis reviews
Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are endogenous inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the balance between MMPs/TIMPs regulates the extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and remodeling during normal development and pathogenesis. Increasing evidence indicates a much more complex role for TIMPs during tumor progression and angiogenesis, in addition to their regulation of MMP-mediated ECM degradation. In this article, we review both the MMP-dependent and -independent actions of TIMPs for the regulation of cell death, cell proliferation, and angiogenesis, with a particular emphasis on TIMP-1 in the regulation of tetraspanin/integrin-mediated cell survival signal transduction pathways.16677129
BCR-bound antigen is targeted to exosomes in human follicular lymphoma B-cells.
Rialland Pascale, Lankar Danielle, Raposo Graça, Bonnerot Christian, Hubert Pascale
Biology of the cell / under the auspices of the European Cell Biology Organization
Exosomes are small membrane vesicles secreted by several cell types during exocytic fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane. Exosomes from tumour cells can transfer antigens from cell to cell, a property favouring antigen-specific immune responses in vitro and in vivo, and are thus an interesting putative therapeutic tool in human cancers. Exosomes have been well studied in EBV (Epstein-Barr virus)-transformed human B-cell lines; however, biological stimuli regulating exosome secretion quantitatively and/or qualitatively still remain poorly defined.
We analysed the effect of the BCR stimulation on exosome release in the human follicular lymphoma B-cell line DOHH2. We found that BCR (B-cell receptor) triggering of DOHH2 cells induced the polarization of CD63(+) MHC class II compartments. Moreover, BCR stimulation increased the release of exosome-associated proteins in the extracellular space. Finally, we found that the BCR was expressed at the surface of exosomes, and could target a bound anti-human IgG to these vesicles.
BCR can modulate the protein content of exosomes upon stimulation, and can target its bound antigen to these vesicles.16670519
Evaluation of basophil activation in food allergy: present and future applications.
Shreffler Wayne G
Current opinion in allergy and clinical immunology
The diagnosis of immediate hypersensitivity relies on specific IgE and history. Because of low specificity, however, provocation challenges are often necessary. Furthermore, IgE testing does not predict features such as reaction severity; nor can it discriminate cross-reactivity from multiple sensitizations. Direct and passive basophil activation tests may address these needs. In addition, measuring basophil activation ex vivo may be useful for monitoring patients with food allergies.
Several papers using basophil activation tests demonstrate comparable sensitivity and specificity to current testing for food allergy. Flow-based basophil activation tests have also been used to assess functional characteristics of patient IgE. Finally, several activation phenotypes have been identified as markers of allergic inflammation in vivo; these phenotypes appear to correspond to earlier reports of spontaneous histamine-releasing basophils in patients with active allergic inflammation.
Although in their early stages, direct basophil activation tests may prove to be useful in the clinic. Indirect basophil activation studies are useful when applied to compare functional aspects of IgE. Identification of basophil activation ex vivo is a promising approach for monitoring allergic inflammation.16633147
Escitalopram, but not its major metabolites, exhibits antiplatelet activity in humans.
Atar Dan, Malinin Alex, Takserman Aviv, Pokov Alex, van Zyl Louis, Tanguay Jean-Francois, Lesperance Francois, Serebruany Victor
Journal of clinical psychopharmacology
Clinical depression has been identified as an independent risk factor for increased mortality during follow-up in patients suffered from acute coronary events, whereas increased platelet activity has been proposed as one of the mechanisms for this association. Some evidence suggests that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and/or their metabolites exhibit potent antiplatelet properties.
We assessed the in vitro effects of preincubation with escalating (50-200 nmol/L) concentrations of escitalopram (ESC) S-desmethyl-citalopram (S-DCT), and S-di-desmethyl-citalopram, (S-DCT) on platelet aggregation through the expression of major surface receptors using flow cytometry and quantitatively using platelet function analyzers in 20 healthy volunteers.
Pretreatment of blood samples with ESC with ESC resulted in a significant inhibition of platelet aggregation induced by ADP (P = 0.0001) and by collagen with the highest dose (P = 0.001). Surface platelet expressions of glycoprotein Ib (CD42) (P = 0.04), lysosome associated membrane protein-3 (CD63) (P = 0.02), and GP37 (CD165) (P = 0.03) was decreased in the ESC-pretreated samples. Closure time by the Platelet Function Analyzer-100 analyzer was prolonged for the 200 nmol/L dose (P = 0.02), indicating platelet inhibition under high shear conditions. Two major metabolites of ESC, namely S-DCT and S-DDCT, did not affect platelet activity.
Escitalopram, but not its metabolites, exhibited selective inhibition of human platelet properties. The direct antiplatelet effect of ESC requires further prospective or ex vivo testing to determine the possible clinical advantage of this finding.16618365
Basophil Activation Test and specific IgE measurements using a panel of recombinant natural rubber latex allergens to determine the latex allergen sensitization profile in children.
Sanz María L, García-Avilés M C, Tabar Ana I, Anda M, García B E, Barber Domingo, Salcedo Gabriel, Rihs Hans-Peter, Raulf-Heimsoth Monika
Pediatric allergy and immunology : official publication of the European Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology
There are no documented studies that describe natural rubber latex (NRL) sensitization in children with a history of surgical intervention but without any congenital malformation (urogenital anomalies, spina bifida, etc.), although some authors have studied NRL allergy in children without a history of surgical intervention. The aim of this work was to evaluate the sensitization profile to single NRL allergens in children without spina bifida and without repeated surgical interventions, by using different recombinant and natural latex allergens in two analytical techniques: specific serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) quantification and flow cytometry determination of activated basophils expressing CD63, after stimulating cells from patients with NRL allergens. A total of 23 patients and 10 healthy children were selected. Conjunctival and in-use NRL provocation tests were carried out, as well as specific IgE determination in all patients' and controls' sera with the recombinant NRL allergens: rHev b 1, rHev b 2, rHev b 3, rHev b 5, rHev b 6.01, rHev b 6.02, rHev b 8, rHev b 9 and rHev b 11 and with NRL (k82) using appropriate ImmunoCAPs. The Basophil Activation Test (BAT) was performed with whole latex extract and with the recombinant allergens rHev b 5 and rHev b 6.01, as well as with the natural allergen Hev b 6.02. The sensitivity and the specificity of NRL-specific IgE (k82) were 100%. Positive IgE responses to rHev b 5 were found in sera of 10 children, to rHev b 6.01 in 16 and for rHev b 6.02 in 15 children's sera. Specific IgE to rHev b 8 was found in four sera of the children. We only found significant differences in sensitization to rHev b 5 in children with two or more surgical interventions compared with the non-intervened group or those with only one intervention. Specific IgE in sera of children with latex-fruit syndrome recognized rHev b 6.02, but not to rHev b 11. The patients sensitized to Hev b 8, Hev b 9 and/or Hev b 11 were atopic. The four patients presenting a positive response to the NRL profilin Hev b 8 were allergic to pollen. The BAT against whole NRL extract was positive in 22 of 23 children; against rHev b 5 in 14 of the patients studied; against rHev b 6.01 in seven cases and against nHev b 6.02 in 19 children. In all the control subjects, the results using this technique were negative. If combined rHev b 5, rHev b 6.01 and nHev b 6.02 together, BAT could detect 20 of the 23 children with latex allergy. The combined use of ImmunoCAP with all the recombinant NRL allergens and BAT with rHev b 5, rHev b 6.01 and nHev b 6.02, enabled the identification of NRL allergy in 22 of 23 patients. There is a positive and significant correlation between sensitization to Hev b 5 and the number of interventions. BAT and allergen-specific IgE determination could be used as first-line in vitro diagnostic tests in patients with NRL allergy.16599242
In vitro basophil activation using CD63 expression in patients with bee and wasp venom allergy.
Eberlein-König B, Schmidt-Leidescher C, Rakoski J, Behrendt H, Ring J
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
The diagnosis of insect venom allergy and the indication for specific immunotherapy is based on history, skin tests and demonstration of hymenoptera venom-specific IgE-antibodies. Cellular tests can add useful information but the role of basophil activation tests for the different venoms has to be elucidated further. We evaluated positive reactions in a basophil activation test using CD63 expression as marker independently for bee or wasp venom in patients with hymenoptera allergy. Fifty-seven patients with a history of insect venom anaphylaxis were examined (12 x bee venom, 39 x wasp venom, 6 x bee plus wasp venom). Skin tests and determination of specific IgE-antibodies were performed. Basophil activation test (BAT) using CD63 expression was performed after stimulation with different concentrations of bee and wasp venom. The BAT is based on double staining with anti-IgE antibodies and anti-CD63 and subsequent determination of the percentage of activated basophils by flow cytometry. In patients with bee venom allergy, BAT was positive in 100% to bee venom and 75% to wasp venom. In patients with bee and wasp venom allergy, positive reactions for both venoms were found in 100%. In patients with wasp venom allergy, 97% reacted positive to wasp venom and only 56% to bee venom. These results show the reliability of the basophil activation test as a cellular test in the in vitro diagnosis in patients with bee and wasp venom allergy. They also show that positive reactions in the basophil activation test reflect both sensitization status and cross-reactivity between venom species.16597088
Anaphylaxis to isosulfan blue and cross-reactivity to patent blue V: case report and review of the nomenclature of vital blue dyes.
Scherer Kathrin, Studer Wolfgang, Figueiredo Verena, Bircher Andreas J
Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology
Blue dyes used for lymphatic mapping in sentinel lymph node biopsy cause intraoperative anaphylactic reactions in up to 2.7% of patients. With increasing implementation of this technique, the incidence of anaphylaxis to these dyes can be expected to increase. In the literature, the chemically often unrelated and inconsistently designated dyes have been confused, adding to other inconsistencies in the nomenclature.
To demonstrate the nomenclature, chemical and physiologic differences, and allergenicity of the various blue dyes used in a medical context.
We describe a patient with an intraoperative grade IV anaphylactic reaction to isosulfan blue. Immediate-type hypersensitivity was proved by positive skin test reactions and CD63 expression to isosulfan blue and cross-reactivity to patent blue V.
A review of the literature clarified the exact nomenclature of the blue dyes and the possible pitfalls of confusing nomenclature in the context of structurally closely related dyes with different allergenic properties. For the detection of type I hypersensitivity, intracutaneous tests are valuable tools. An IgE-mediated mechanism has been shown recently. In most cases, sensitization exists without known previous exposure in a medical context. This may be due to the widespread use of such dyes in objects of everyday life. Preoperative antiallergic medication use does not prevent anaphylactic reactions but apparently reduces their severity.
For better comparison and precision, the Chemical Abstracts Service number of the respective dye should always be given.16584800
Elevation of monocyte-derived microparticles in patients with diabetic retinopathy.
Ogata Nahoko, Nomura Shosaku, Shouzu Akira, Imaizumi Masahito, Arichi Miwa, Matsumura Miyo
Diabetes research and clinical practice
Diabetic retinopathy is associated with microvascular damage and capillary occlusions which are common features of the microangiopathy in diabetes. Monocyte-derived microparticles (MDMPs) are released from activated monocytes and enhance the procoagulant activity, and also activate adhesion reactions. These are key events in the development of capillary occlusion. The MDMPs level in the blood, and platelet activation markers (platelet-derived microparticles (PDMPs), CD62P and CD63) were measured by flow cytometry in 72 diabetic patients. The plasma levels of intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and P-selectin were analyzed by ELISA. The level of MDMPs was significantly correlated with the levels of PDMPs (r=0.52, P<0.001), CD62P (r=0.37, P=0.001), CD63 (r=0.31 and P=0.007), P-selectin (r=0.38, P=0.001), and ICAM-1 (r=0.31, P=0.009). The MDMPs level increased with the progression of the diabetic retinopathy: 81+/-14/10(4)platelets (plts) in patients without retinopathy (n=10); 88+/-8/10(4)plts with mild or moderate non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR, n=12); 95+/-8/10(4)plts with severe NPDR (n=24); and 112+/-9/10(4)plts with proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) (n=26). The MDMPs level in patients with areas of capillary occlusion (123+/-10/10(4)plts, n=25) was significantly higher than that in patients without areas of capillary occlusion (84+/-5/10(4)plts, n=25; P=0.0008). These correlations suggest that increased levels of MDMPs may accelerate the progression of diabetic retinopathy.16580071
IgE cross-reactivity between the major peanut allergen Ara h 2 and tree nut allergens.
de Leon M P, Drew A C, Glaspole I N, Suphioglu C, O'Hehir R E, Rolland J M
Molecular immunology
Allergy to peanut and tree nuts is characterised by a high frequency of life-threatening anaphylactic reactions and typically lifelong persistence. Although peanut is the most common cause of nut allergy, peanut allergic patients are frequently also sensitive to tree nuts. It is not known if this is due to cross-reactivity between peanut and tree nut allergens. In this study, the major peanut allergen Ara h 2 was cloned from peanut cDNA, expressed in E. coli cells as a His-tag fusion protein and purified using a Ni-NTA column. Immunoblotting, ELISA and basophil activation indicated by CD63 expression all confirmed the IgE reactivity and biological activity of rAra h 2. To determine whether or not this allergen plays a role in IgE cross-reactivity between peanut and tree nuts, inhibition ELISA was performed. Pre-incubation of serum from peanut allergic patients with increasing concentrations of almond or Brazil nut extract inhibited IgE binding to rAra h 2. Purified rAra h 2-specific serum IgE antibodies also bound to proteins present in almond and Brazil nut extracts by immunoblotting. This indicates that the major peanut allergen, Ara h 2, shares common IgE-binding epitopes with almond and Brazil nut allergens, which may contribute to the high incidence of tree nut sensitisation in peanut allergic individuals.16563377
Fas-ligand is stored in secretory lysosomes of ocular barrier epithelia and released with microvesicles.
McKechnie Nicol M, King Benjamin C R, Fletcher Emma, Braun Gabriele
Experimental eye research
Previously we described the release of hr44 from the ciliary epithelium to coincide with the loss of the late endosomal/lysosomal marker protein CD63 in mildly inflamed rat eyes. We showed that both proteins are released with microvesicles into the supernatant of cultured retinal pigmented epithelial cells (ARPE-19). Here we wish to determine whether there is a concomitant loss of fas-ligand (FasL) in vivo and whether ocular epithelial cells have secretory lysosomes similar to T cells, from where FasL and hr44 could derive. FasL plays an important role in immunity, immune cell homeostasis and in the maintenance of immune privilege in the eye. However the mode of release of FasL from ocular epithelial cells or its activity in the eye is not fully understood. In normal rat eyes, FasL was detected in the epithelia of the iris and ciliary body and in the anterior region of the retinal pigmented epithelium. FasL is expressed constitutively and is associated with vesicular structures in the normal ciliary epithelium but is not detectable in the ciliary epithelium of inflamed eyes. In contrast, the posterior RPE, which under normal conditions is negative for FasL and hr44 showed strong staining for both molecules in areas adjacent to sub-retinal inflammatory infiltrates. Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis indicated that cultured ARPE-19 cells express both the soluble and membrane form of FasL. The intracellular concentration of FasL was significantly increased in cells grown in presence of interferon (INF)-gamma. The microvesicles released by cultured ARPE-19 cells and previously shown to be positive for hr44 and CD63 are also positive for membrane FasL. Expression of a recombinant fluorescent construct of FasL together with immuno-staining for CD63 demonstrated that FasL localises to the endocytic compartment of ARPE-19 cells and of melanoma cells (positive control). In cells with lysosomes devoid of specialised secretory functions (e g. HeLa cells) recombinant FasL localised to the cell membrane, demonstrating that RPE cells have secretory lysosomes. We suggest that ocular epithelial cells release soluble FasL and the membrane form of FasL with vesicles. Both forms may contribute in different ways to the effectiveness of the ocular immune response and immune privilege.16537806
Identification of a homozygous deletion in the AP3B1 gene causing Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, type 2.
Jung Johannes, Bohn Georg, Allroth Anna, Boztug Kaan, Brandes Gudrun, Sandrock Inga, Schäffer Alejandro A, Rathinam Chozhavendan, Köllner Inga, Beger Carmela, Schilke Reinhard, Welte Karl, Grimbacher Bodo, Klein Christoph
Blood
We report on the molecular etiology of an unusual clinical phenotype associating congenital neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, developmental delay, and hypopigmentation. Using genetic linkage analysis and targeted gene sequencing, we defined a homozygous genomic deletion in AP3B1, the gene encoding the beta chain of the adaptor protein-3 (AP-3) complex. The mutation leads to in-frame skipping of exon 15 and thus perturbs proper assembly of the heterotetrameric AP-3 complex. Consequently, trafficking of transmembrane lysosomal proteins is aberrant, as shown for CD63. In basal keratinocytes, the incorporated immature melanosomes were rapidly degraded in large phagolysosomes. Despite distinct ultramorphologic changes suggestive of aberrant vesicular maturation, no functional aberrations were detected in neutrophil granulocytes. However, a comprehensive immunologic assessment revealed that natural killer (NK) and NKT-cell numbers were reduced in AP-3-deficient patients. Our findings extend the clinical and molecular phenotype of human AP-3 deficiency (also known as Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, type 2) and provide further insights into the role of the AP-3 complex for the innate immune system.16537631
Role of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 PTAP motif in Gag targeting and particle release.
Dorweiler Irene J, Ruone Susan J, Wang Huating, Burry Richard W, Mansky Louis M
Journal of virology
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Gag is targeted to the plasma membrane for particle assembly and release. How HTLV-1 Gag targeting occurs is not well understood. The PPPY and PTAP motifs were previously shown to be involved in HTLV-1 particle release with PTAP playing a more subtle role in virus budding. These L domains function through the interaction with host cellular proteins normally involved in multivesicular body (MVB) morphogenesis. The plasma membrane pathway rather than the MVB pathway was found to be the primary pathway for HTLV-1 particle release in HeLa cells. Intriguingly, disruption of the PTAP motif led to a defect in the targeting of Gag from the plasma membrane to CD63-positive MVBs. Particles or particle buds were observed to be associated with MVBs by electron microscopy, implying that Gag targeting to the MVB resulted in particle budding. Blocking clathrin-dependent endocytosis was found not to influence localization of the HTLV-1 Gag PTAP mutant, indicating that Gag did not reach the MVBs through clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Our observations imply that the interaction between Gag and TSG101 is not required for Gag targeting to the MVB. Overexpression of dynamitin p50 increased particle release, suggesting that there was an increase in the intracellular transport of MVBs to the cell periphery by the utilization of the dynein-dynactin motor complex. Intriguingly, virus particle release with this mutant was reduced by 20-fold compared to that of wild type in HeLa cells, which is in marked contrast to the less-than-twofold defect observed for particle production of the HTLV-1 Gag PTAP mutant from 293T cells. These results indicate that the role of the PTAP motif in L domain function is cell type dependent.16537294
Mechanisms and biomarkers of cardiovascular injury induced by phosphodiesterase inhibitor III SK&F 95654 in the spontaneously hypertensive rat.
Zhang Jun, Herman Eugene H, Robertson Donald G, Reily Michael D, Knapton Alan, Ratajczak Helen V, Rifai Nader, Honchel Ronald, Blanchard Kerry T, Stoll Raymond E, Sistare Frank D
Toxicologic pathology
The cardiovascular injury of the type III selective PDE inhibitor SK&F 95654 was investigated in SHR. Twenty-four hours after a single sc injection of 100 or 200 mg/kg of the drug, rats exhibited cardiomyocyte necrosis and apoptosis, interstitial inflammation, hemorrhage and edema, as well as mesenteric arterial hemorrhage and necrosis, periarteritis, EC and VSMC apoptosis, EC activation, and MC activation and degranulation. Elevated serum levels of cTnT and decreased cTnT immunoperoxidase staining on cardiomyocytes were detected in the drug-treated rats. Serum levels of alpha2-macroglobulin and IL-6 were significantly elevated following drug treatment. NMR spectral patterns of urine samples are significantly different between the drug-treated and control rats. These results indicate that measurement of serum cTnT, acute phase proteins, and cytokines as well as metabonomic urine profiles may serve as potential biomarkers for drug-induced cardiovascular injury in rats. Increased expression of CD63 on MC (tissue biomarker of MC), of nitrotyrosine on MC and EC (an indirect indicator of NO in vivo), and of iNOS on MC and EC (source of NO) suggest that NO produced by activated and degranulated MC as well as activated EC play an important role in SK&F 95654-induced mesenteric vascular injury.16536221
Immunohistological analysis of normal and osteoarthritic human synovial tissue.
Korkusuz Petek, Dagdeviren Attila, Eksioglu Fatih, Ors Ulken
Bulletin (Hospital for Joint Diseases (New York, N.Y.))
Intercellular communication mediated by cell surface antigens is important in the maintenance of synovial tissue (ST) integrity. Chronic inflammation is a common feature of osteoarthritis (OA). Cellular attachment to and migration into ST is one of the critical aspects of chronic inflammation. This study was undertaken to examine the tissue distribution of a broad spectrum of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) containing tetraspan antigens (CD9, CD63, CD151), endothelial cell antigens (CD31, CD36, CD105, CD106, CD146), integrins (CD49a-f, CD29, CD41, CD51, CD61), CD39, CD98, CD99, CD143 and, CD147 supplied from fifth and sixth international workshops and conferences on human leukocyte differentiation antigens in a comparative manner in human OA and normal synovium. Ten primary OA patients and six normal individuals were included in this study. The average age of the patients was 65.0 +/- 8.3 years and the average age of the controls was 31.8 +/- 5.3 years. Sections were screened using an indirect immunoperoxidase method. Tetraspan antigens and CD98 presented rather unique staining pattern in OA synovium suggesting special roles for each antigen on the synovial lining layer (SLL). Endothelial cells and type A synoviocytes expressed CD31 and CD36 in OA, but only endothelium in normal subjects. Integrins presented a uniform staining pattern in both groups. There was a positive reaction in some of the ST stromal elements for CD143 in all specimens. In conclusion, human normal and OA synovium were comparatively reviewed by a broad spectrum of mAbs with special attention being given to their functional aspects. This data suggests a significant difference in antigenic phenotype of SLL cells in OA and ST not to be considered at a normal-like state in OA. The fact that their activation was independent of the degree of lymphocyte infiltration further emphasizes the possible central importance of SLL.16533950
Exosomes and HIV Gag bud from endosome-like domains of the T cell plasma membrane.
Booth Amy M, Fang Yi, Fallon Jonathan K, Yang Jr-Ming, Hildreth James E K, Gould Stephen J
The Journal of cell biology
Exosomes are secreted, single membrane organelles of approximately 100 nm diameter. Their biogenesis is typically thought to occur in a two-step process involving (1) outward vesicle budding at limiting membranes of endosomes (outward = away from the cytoplasm), which generates intralumenal vesicles, followed by (2) endosome-plasma membrane fusion, which releases these internal vesicles into the extracellular milieu as exosomes. In this study, we present evidence that certain cells, including Jurkat T cells, possess discrete domains of plasma membrane that are enriched for exosomal and endosomal proteins, retain the endosomal property of outward vesicle budding, and serve as sites of immediate exosome biogenesis. It has been hypothesized that retroviruses utilize the exosome biogenesis pathway for the formation of infectious particles. In support of this, we find that Jurkat T cells direct the key budding factor of HIV, HIV Gag, to these endosome-like domains of plasma membrane and secrete HIV Gag from the cell in exosomes.16507770
Innate immunity defects in Hermansky-Pudlak type 2 syndrome.
Fontana Stefania, Parolini Silvia, Vermi William, Booth Sarah, Gallo Federico, Donini Marta, Benassi Marzia, Gentili Francesca, Ferrari Daniela, Notarangelo Lucia D, Cavadini Patrizia, Marcenaro Emanuela, Dusi Stefano, Cassatella Marco, Facchetti Fabio, Griffiths Gillian M, Moretta Alessandro, Notarangelo Luigi D, Badolato Raffaele
Blood
Adaptor protein-3 (AP-3) is an ubiquitous cytoplasmic complex that shuttles cargo proteins from the trans-Golgi and a tubular-endosomal compartment to endosome-lysosome-related organelles. Lack of the beta3A subunit of this complex causes Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by partial albinism, prolonged bleeding tendency, and immunodeficiency. To investigate the pathogenesis of immunodeficiency, we studied natural killer (NK) cells and neutrophil functions in 2 previously unreported siblings affected by Hermansky-Pudlak type 2 syndrome. In both patients we observed a dramatic reduction of cytolytic activity of freshly isolated and of IL-2-activated NK cells. Levels of perforin were reduced in unstimulated NK cells, thereby accounting for the impairment of NK cytolitic activity. In addition, analysis of neutrophils in these patients demonstrated that intracellular elastase content was largely reduced while CD63 expression on plasma membrane was substantially increased. Taken together, these observations suggest that type 2 Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is characterized by defects of innate immunity.16501079
Annexin 2: a novel human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag binding protein involved in replication in monocyte-derived macrophages.
Ryzhova Elena V, Vos Robin M, Albright Andrew V, Harrist Alexia V, Harvey Thomas, González-Scarano Francisco
Journal of virology
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) replication in the major natural target cells, CD4+ T lymphocytes and macrophages, is parallel in many aspects of the virus life cycle. However, it differs as to viral assembly and budding, which take place on plasma membranes in T cells and on endosomal membranes in macrophages. It has been postulated that cell type-specific host factors may aid in directing viral assembly to distinct destinations. In this study we defined annexin 2 (Anx2) as a novel HIV Gag binding partner in macrophages. Anx2-Gag binding was confined to productively infected macrophages and was not detected in quiescently infected monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) in which an HIV replication block was mapped to the late stages of the viral life cycle (A. V. Albright, R. M. Vos, and F. Gonzalez-Scarano, Virology 325:328-339, 2004). We demonstrate that the Anx2-Gag interaction likely occurs at the limiting membranes of late endosomes/multivesicular bodies and that Anx2 depletion is associated with a significant decline in the infectivity of released virions; this coincided with incomplete Gag processing and inefficient incorporation of CD63. Cumulatively, our data suggest that Anx2 is essential for the proper assembly of HIV in MDM.16480352
Anaphylaxis to Gelofusine confirmed by in vitro basophil activation test: a case series.
Apostolou E, Deckert K, Puy R, Sandrini A, de Leon M P, Douglass J A, Rolland J M, O'hehir R E
Anaesthesia
The plasma expander Gelofusine (succinylated gelatin) is a recognised cause of peri-operative anaphylaxis. Current diagnosis of Gelofusine sensitivity is by skin testing, a procedure that itself carries a risk of allergic reaction. We evaluated the reliability of the in vitro basophil activation test as a diagnostic assay for Gelofusine sensitivity in subjects with a clinical history highly suggestive of Gelofusine allergy. Six patients with peri-operative anaphylaxis clinically attributed to Gelofusine were skin tested to confirm sensitivity. Control subjects included three healthy subjects and five subjects allergic to a neuromuscular blocking drug, all negative on Gelofusine skin testing. Whole blood basophil activation to Gelofusine was analysed by flow cytometry for CD63 surface expression. All of the Gelofusine sensitive patients and one of the control allergic subjects showed positive basophil activation to Gelofusine. In this series of subjects, the basophil activation test for Gelofusine allergy had a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 87.5%. Our findings suggest that basophil activation testing is a safe and reliable in vitro assay for prediction or confirmation of Gelofusine sensitivity in patients with high clinical suspicion of Gelofusine-induced anaphylaxis.16447754
[HIV encephalopathy].
Miura Yoshiharu, Koyanagi Yoshio
Rinshō shinkeigaku = Clinical neurology
HIV encephalopathy is one of the complexified viral diseases. In the infected brains, HIV-infection is restricted in macrophages and microglia although its damage extends to neurons and oligodendrocytes. Accumulating evidences have suggested that many viral and host factors are involved in this disease. However, its precise mechanism is still unsolved. To examine the mechanism of the disease, we developed an HIV-1-infected human cell-transplanted mouse model and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand was identified as a neurotoxic host factors in HIV-infected brain. Next, we examined the neurotoxic host factors using co-culture system with macrophage-tropic HIV-1-infected macrophages as followings: Target brain cells are murine neuron/glia mixed culture, murine neurospehre-forming culture and rat brain hippocampus slice culture. In these systems, neurons and neural stem cells were preferentially damaged. On the other hand, we also identified two anti-HIV genes, CD 14 and CD63 (dN), which inhibit HIV-1-induced cytotoxicity using a lentiviral screening system. Because they express on monocyte or activated macrophage and microglia, these results suggest that CXCR4-using HIV-1 cannnot expand inside of brain. We also extended the screening system to identify the host factors which protect against HIV-1-induced encephalopathy. Our study will contibute to development of new therapeutic strategy for HIV encephalopathy as well as other CNS diseases.16439610
P-selectin- and CD63-exposing platelet microparticles reflect platelet activation in peripheral arterial disease and myocardial infarction.
van der Zee P Marc, Biró Eva, Ko Yung, de Winter Robbert J, Hack C Erik, Sturk Augueste, Nieuwland Rienk
Clinical chemistry
Platelet-derived microparticles (PMPs) are generally considered a marker of platelet activation in cardiovascular disease. We studied the extent to which PMP subpopulations parallel platelet activation in vitro and in vivo.
Using flow cytometry, we analyzed PMP subpopulations from resting and activated platelets in vitro (n = 6) as well as from plasma samples of patients with stable angina, peripheral arterial disease, or myocardial infarction [non-ST-elevation (NSTEMI) and ST-elevation (STEMI)] and from older, age- and sex-matched and young healthy individuals [n = 10 for all groups except NSTEMI (n = 11)]. Coagulation markers prothrombin fragment F(1 + 2) and thrombin-antithrombin complexes were determined by ELISA. The PMP-associated fraction of soluble (s)P-selectin was estimated by ELISA.
In vitro, stimulation of platelets with thrombin receptor-activating peptide (15 micromol/L) or the calcium ionophore A23187 (2.5 micromol/L) increased fractions of both platelets and PMPs exposing P-selectin or CD63 (P <0.001 for all). Whereas the number of PMPs released by A23187-stimulated platelets increased significantly (P <0.001), the number of PMPs released from thrombin receptor-activating peptide-stimulated platelets remained constant (P >0.05). Ex vivo, numbers of circulating PMPs were comparable in all groups. Compared with young persons, P-selectin-exposing PMPs were increased in older persons (P = 0.02) and were further increased in patients with NSTEMI (P = 0.007) and STEMI (P = 0.045). CD63-exposing PMPs were increased in patients with peripheral arterial disease (P = 0.041), NSTEMI (P = 0.001), and STEMI (P = 0.049). Subpopulations exposing P-selectin or CD63 correlated with each other (r = 0.581; P <0.001), but neither correlated with the plasma concentrations of F(1 + 2) or thrombin-antithrombin complexes. The PMP-associated fraction of sP-selectin constituted only 2.2 (4.7)% [mean (SD)] of total sP-selectin.
PMP subpopulations reflect platelet activation status better than the total number of PMPs. Increased concentrations of circulating PMP subpopulations are found in aging, and further increases are encountered in peripheral arterial disease and myocardial infarction.16436139
Diagnosis of neuromuscular blocking agent hypersensitivity reactions using cytofluorimetric analysis of basophils.
Kvedariene V, Kamey S, Ryckwaert Y, Rongier M, Bousquet J, Demoly P, Arnoux B
Allergy
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated hypersensitivity reactions to neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) are common and life threatening. Basophil activation based upon the expression of CD63 in the presence of specific allergens was found to be of importance for the diagnosis of IgE-mediated hypersensibility.
The Basotest was evaluated for the diagnosis of NMBA in 47 patients with proven NMBA anaphylaxis, 40 atopic subjects nonallergic to NMBA and five healthy volunteers. Diagnosis of NMBA was made according to international standards on clinical history, skin tests and provocation tests when needed.
In the NMBA allergic patients, sensitivity of Basotest was 36.1%, but it increased to 85.7% for reactions which occurred within the last 3 years. The specificity was 93.3%.
Basotest may be useful for the diagnosis of NMBA allergy in patients with a suspicion of recent IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction to NMBA.16436137
Basophil allergen threshold sensitivity: a useful approach to anti-IgE treatment efficacy evaluation.
Nopp A, Johansson S G O, Ankerst J, Bylin G, Cardell L O, Grönneberg R, Irander K, Palmqvist M, Oman H
Allergy
Monitoring of the allergen sensitivity of a patient is most important for optimal patient care and a basic prerequisite for immunomodulating treatment. The objective of this study was to investigate how basophil allergen sensitivity can be applied in the monitoring of anti-immunoglobulin E (IgE) treatment.
Basophils from timothy grass pollen allergic patients were, by flow cytometry, analysed for allergen threshold sensitivity (CD-sens) by measuring CD63 up-regulation on CD203c-identified basophils. The results were compared with maximal percentage CD63 up-regulation at one allergen dose (CD-max), skin prick test end-point allergen titration, (SPT-sens), nasal provocation titration tests (nasal provocation titre) and serum IgE and IgE antibody concentrations.
There was a significant correlation (r = 0.50, P = 0.01) between CD-sens and SPT-sens, CD-sens and the IgE antibody concentration in percentage of 'total IgE' (relative IgE antibody concentration) (r = 0.72, P < 0.001) as well as between CD-sens and nasal provocation titre (r = 0.54, P < 0.05) but, in contrast, CD-max did not correlate with any of the sensitization parameters, i.e. SPT-sens, nasal provocation titre, absolute and relative IgE antibody concentration or CD-sens. CD-sens could be used to monitor omalizumab treatment efficacy while, based on CD-max, four of seven symptom-free patients on omalizumab would have been classified as having ongoing allergy.
CD-sens seems to be very useful for the determination of a patient's allergen sensitivity and should be evaluated for the measurement and monitoring of anti-IgE treatment efficacy. CD-max, the conventional approach to basophil allergen challenge, which mirrors cell reactivity, gives incorrect information.16434403
Serial analysis of gene expression in mouse uterus at the implantation site.
Ma Xing-Hong, Hu Shi-Jun, Ni Hua, Zhao Yue-Chao, Tian Zhen, Liu Ji-Long, Ren Gang, Liang Xiao-Huan, Yu Hao, Wan Ping, Yang Zeng-Ming
The Journal of biological chemistry
Although oligonucleotide chips, cDNA microarrays, differential display reverse transcription-PCR, and other approaches have been used to screen implantation-related molecules, the mechanism by which embryo implantation occurs is still unknown. The aim of this study was to profile the differential gene expression between interimplantation site and implantation site in mouse uterus on day 5 of pregnancy by serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE). In our two SAGE libraries of 11-bp tags, the total numbers of tags sequenced were 48,121 for the interimplantation site and 50,227 for the implantation site. There were 1,039 tags specifically expressed at interimplantation site, and 1,252 tags specifically expressed at the implantation site. Based on the p value, there were 195 tags significantly up-regulated at the interimplantation site and 261 tags significantly up-regulated at the implantation site, of which 100 genes were single matched at the interimplantation site and 127 genes were single matched at the implantation site, respectively. By reverse transcription-PCR, the tag ratio between the implantation site and interimplantation site was verified on 14 significantly changed genes. Using in situ hybridization, 1810014L12Rik, Psmb5, Cd63, Npm1, Fads3, and Tagln2 were shown to be highly expressed at the implantation site compared with the interimplantation site. Compared with the interimplantation site, Ddx39 was strongly expressed in the subluminal stromal cells at the implantation site on day 5 of pregnancy. Ddx39 expression at the implantation site was specifically induced by active blastocysts. Additionally, Ddx39 expression was significantly up-regulated by estrogen in the ovariectomized mice. In our SAGE data, many implantation-related genes were identified in mouse uterus. Our data could be a valuable source for future study on embryo implantation.16431848
Organic extracts of urban aerosol (< or =PM2.5) enhance rBet v 1-induced upregulation of CD63 in basophils from birch pollen-allergic individuals.
Schober Wolfgang, Belloni Benedetta, Lubitz Stefanie, Eberlein-König Bernadette, Bohn Patrick, Saritas Yücel, Lintelmann Jutta, Matuschek Georg, Behrendt Heidrun, Buters Jeroen
Toxicological sciences : an official journal of the Society of Toxicology
Epidemiological studies have linked the high prevalence rates of IgE-mediated allergic diseases to an increase in exposure to traffic-related air pollutants such as diesel exhaust particles (DEPs). There is growing experimental evidence that organic compounds of DEPs, predominantly polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), participate in the development and maintenance of allergic airway diseases. In this study we investigated the impact of organic extracts of urban aerosol (AERex) containing various PAH concentrations on the activation of human basophils. Whole blood samples from six birch pollen-allergic and five control subjects were repeatedly incubated in the presence of AERex with or without recombinant Bet v 1 (rBet v 1). Basophils were analyzed for CD63 expression as a measure of basophil activation by using multiparameter flow cytometry. Basophils, when exposed in vitro to AERex and rBet v 1, expressed CD63 significantly more than with antigen activation alone. AERex synergized with rBet v 1 in a dose-dependent manner, but did not activate basophils from nonallergic donors. AERex effect on CD63 upregulation was found in blood samples of all patients and did not occur in the absence of rBet v 1. Strongest basophil activation was monitored upon stimulation with AERex comprising the highest PAH content. The capability of AERex to increase activation of basophils from birch pollen-allergic subjects at ambient concentrations suggests an important role of organic compounds of airborne particles in the aggravation of IgE-mediated allergic diseases. This could be a new aspect of regulation of unspecific promoting stimuli in clinical manifestation of allergic inflammation.16410552
Trafficking from CD63-positive late endocytic multivesicular bodies is essential for intracellular development of Chlamydia trachomatis.
Beatty Wandy L
Journal of cell science
Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens that replicate solely within the confines of a membrane-bound vacuole termed an inclusion. Within this protected organelle, chlamydiae acquire host-cell-derived biosynthetic precursors necessary for intracellular subsistence, yet the mechanisms and pathways responsible for this acquisition remain elusive. The present study identifies an interaction between the chlamydial inclusion and multivesicular bodies, complex organelles pivotal in protein and lipid transport that are positioned along the endosome-lysosome pathway, and intersect the exocytic pathway in various cell types. Resident protein and lipid constituents of multivesicular bodies colocalized with intracellular chlamydiae, with direct delivery of the resident protein CD63 to the chlamydial inclusion. Interruption of trafficking from multivesicular bodies by pharmacological inhibitors and exogenous antibodies subsequently disrupted sphingolipid delivery to the maturing chlamydial inclusion and intracellular bacterial growth. This study identifies a trafficking pathway from CD63-positive multivesicular bodies to the bacterial inclusion, a novel interaction that provides essential lipids necessary for maintenance of a productive intracellular infection.16409299
Bacitracin reveals a role for multiple thiol isomerases in platelet function.
Robinson Aisling, O'Neill Sarah, Kiernan Aoife, O'Donoghue Niaobh, Moran Niamh
British journal of haematology
The platelet-specific integrin alphaIIb beta3 has endogenous thiol isomerase activity associated with the CXXC motifs within the beta subunit. Using a highly purified form of bacitracin, a thiol isomerase inhibitor, we now provide further evidence of the functional significance of this enzymatic activity in integrin activation. In addition, we demonstrate a role for multiple thiol isomerases in platelet function. This bacitracin prevented platelet aggregation to thrombin and collagen, and directly inhibited alphaIIb beta3 activation, as detected by PAC-1 binding. In parallel, bacitracin inhibited the endogenous thiol isomerase activity of purified alphaIIb beta3 with a 50% inhibitory concentration of 15.5 micromol/l. In order to determine whether the effects of bacitracin are solely mediated by inhibition of integrin enzymatic activity, we examined integrin-independent indices of platelet activation. We found bacitracin inhibited both platelet secretion (CD62P and CD63) and thromboxane (TxA2) production, with complete inhibition at different concentrations. Thus, we demonstrated a role for multiple thiol isomerases in platelet function. Taken together, these studies support a role for the endogenous integrin thiol isomerase activity in activation of alphaIIb beta3 and highlight the novel regulation of platelet function by other, as yet undefined thiol isomerases.16407131
Immature dendritic cell-derived exosomes can mediate HIV-1 trans infection.
Wiley Rebecca D, Gummuluru Suryaram
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
Immature dendritic cells (DCs) capture HIV type 1 (HIV-1) and can transmit captured virus particles to T cells. In this report, we show that HIV-1 particles captured by DCs can be transmitted to T cells by exocytosis without de novo infection. Captured HIV-1 particles were rapidly endocytosed to tetraspan protein (CD9, CD63)-positive endocytic compartments that were reminiscent of multivesicular endosomal bodies. Furthermore, some of the endocytosed virus particles were constitutively released into the extracellular milieu in association with HLA-DR1(+), CD1b(+), CD9(+), and CD63(+) vesicles (exosomes) and could initiate productive infections of CD4(+) target cells. Surprisingly, the exocytosed vesicle-associated HIV-1 particles from DCs were 10-fold more infectious on a perparticle basis than cell-free virus particles. These studies describe a previously undescribed mechanism of DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission and suggest that virus particle trafficking to multivesicular endosomal bodies and subsequent exocytosis can provide HIV-1 particles captured by DCs an avenue for immune escape.16401308
Clinically apparent atherosclerotic disease in diabetes is associated with an increase in platelet microparticle levels.
Tan K T, Tayebjee M H, Lim H S, Lip G Y H
Diabetic medicine : a journal of the British Diabetic Association
The commonest cause of mortality in patients with Type 2 diabetes is atherothrombosis, which can be related to abnormalities in the coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways, as well as in platelet function. Platelet microparticles (PMPs) may contribute to the prothrombotic state and may promote the progression of atherosclerosis. We hypothesized that PMPs are elevated in Type 2 diabetes and that patients with Type 2 diabetes and clinically apparent atherosclerosis would have the highest levels. Similarly, we hypothesized that soluble plasma P-selectin (sPsel) and CD40L (both molecules which are released by activated platelets), as well as %CD62P (P-selectin) and %CD63 positivity on platelets quantified by flow cytometry, would be highest in patients with Type 2 diabetes and clinically apparent atherosclerotic disease, and might be correlated to PMP levels.
Venous blood was obtained from 21 Type 2 diabetic patients without atherosclerotic complications, 18 diabetic patients with clinically apparent atherosclerotic disease and 21 non-diabetic control subjects. PMPs, as well as %CD62P and %CD63 positivity on platelets, were quantified by flow cytometry. sPsel and CD40L were measured using ELISA.
Patients with Type 2 diabetes and clinically apparent atherosclerotic disease had the highest PMP (P=0.045) and sPsel (P=0.046) levels, compared with patients without complications (who had intermediate PMP levels) and control subjects. Control subjects had the lowest CD40L levels (P<0.001) when compared with patients with Type 2 diabetes, with no difference in sCD40L levels between the two diabetic subgroups. %CD62P and %CD63 positivity did not differ between the groups. PMP levels correlated with %CD62P positivity (P=0.026) but not to %CD63 positivity (P=0.089), sCD40L (P=0.407) or sP-sel (P=0.163); sCD40L levels did not correlate with any other marker of platelet activation.
PMPs are elevated in Type 2 diabetes. In addition, patients with clinically apparent atherosclerosis had the highest levels of PMPs and sPsel. Thus, PMPs may be a marker of symptomatic atherosclerotic vascular disease in Type 2 diabetes, and may both represent a useful risk stratification tool as well as a novel therapeutic target for anti-thrombotic drugs.16395182
Osteogenic potential of adult human stem cells of the lumbar vertebral body and the iliac crest.
Risbud Makarand V, Shapiro Irving M, Guttapalli Asha, Di Martino Alberto, Danielson Keith G, Beiner John M, Hillibrand Alan, Albert Todd J, Anderson D Greg, Vaccaro Alexander R
Spine
Marrow was aspirated from the vertebral body (VB) and iliac crest (IC) of patients undergoing lumbar spinal surgery, following an approved protocol. Progenitor cells were isolated using standard culture conditions and their osteogenic potential evaluated.
To evaluate the osteogenic potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) isolated from the bone marrow of the human VB.
IC marrow grafting during cervical discectomy and fusion procedure is associated with donor site morbidity. Since the VB contains marrow cells, it may be possible to circumvent this problem by using this tissue for osseous graft supplementation. However, there is paucity of information concerning the osteogenic potential of non-IC-derived progenitor cells. Herein, we address this issue.
Marrow samples from VB of patients undergoing lumbar spinal surgery were collected; marrow was also harvested from the IC. Progenitor cells were isolated and the number of colony forming unit-fibroblastic (CFU-F) determined. The osteogenic potential of the cells was characterized using biochemical and molecular biology techniques.
Both the VB and IC marrow generated small, medium, and large sized CFU-F. Higher numbers of CFU-F were obtained from the VB marrow than the IC (P < 0.05). Progenitor cells from both anatomic sites expressed comparable levels of CD166, CD105, CD49a, and CD63. Moreover, progenitor cells from the VB exhibited an increased level of alkaline phosphatase activity. MSCs of the VB and the IC displayed similar levels of expression of Runx-2, collagen Type I, CD44, ALCAM, and ostecalcin. The level of expression of bone sialoprotein was higher in MSC from the IC than the VB. VB and IC cells mineralized their extracellular matrix to a similar extent.
Our studies show that CFU-F frequency is higher in the marrow of the VB than the IC. Progenitor cells isolated from both sites respond in a similar manner to an osteogenic stimulus and express common immunophenotypes. Based on these findings, we propose that progenitor cells from the lumbar vertebral marrow would be suitable candidate for osseous graft supplementation in spinal fusion procedures. Studies must now be conducted using animal models to ascertain if cells of the VB are as effective as those of the IC for the fusion applications.16387079
Clinical study of Lipo PGE1-inhibiting platelet activation in acute rejection after kidney transplantation.
Zhang Y, Guan D L, Xia C Q, Han Z Y, Xu J J, Gao J Z, Wu K R
Transplantation proceedings
To observe the efficacy of the platelet activation inhibitor Lipo PGE1 therapy in the recovery of graft function after an acute rejection episode after kidney transplantation. Forty patients with acute rejection after kidney transplantation were randomly assigned into groups treated with or without Lipo PGE1. The expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on platelet surfaces were assayed by flow cytometry. The recovery time for graft function and 1-year patient and graft survival rates were recorded. Compared with controls, the expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 were lower among acute rejection patients who received Lipo PGE1 therapy. The recovery time for graft function was shorter and the 1-year patient and graft survival rates higher. Lipo PGE1 therapy in patients with acute rejection episodes may inhibit platelet activation thereby benefiting graft functional recovery. The 1-year survival rates of patients and grafts might be increased if the expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on the platelet surfaces was decreased by Lipo PGE1 therapy.16333666
Activation of blood platelets in echinococcosis--CD62P and CD63 expression.
Matowicka-Karna Joanna, Kemona Halina, Dymicka-Piekarska Violetta, Butkiewicz Anna
Parasitology research
16331822
[Significance of serum CD62p and CD63 levels in patients with head injury].
Cai Hua-bo
Zhejiang da xue xue bao. Yi xue ban = Journal of Zhejiang University. Medical sciences
To determine the serum levels of CD62p (alpha-granular membrane protein) and CD63 (lysosome intact membrane protein) in patients with head injury and to observe its relation to injury severity.
Fifty-three patients with head injury were divided into 3 groups; Group A patients with mild head injury; Group B with moderate head injury; and Group C with severe head injury. The serum levels of CD62p, CD63 were measured on 12 h, d 1, 3, 5 and 7 after injury.
The serum levels of CD62p and CD63 in Group B and Group C were higher than those in Group A and control (P<0.05). The serum level of CD62p in Group C was higher than that in Group B (P<0.05). The serum levels of CD62p in Group C on d 1, 3, 5 after injury were higher than those on 12 h (P<0.05). The serum level of CD63 in Group B on d 3 after injury were higher than that on 12 h (P<0.05). The serum levels of CD63 in Group C on d 1, 3, 5 after injury were higher than those on 12 h (P<0.05).
The serum levels of CD62p and CD63 in patients with head injury may be helpful for identifying the severity of injury, and CD62p seems to be more sensitive.16324252
[Relation of ME491/CD63 gene and integrin alpha5 in the invasion and metastases of ovarian cancer].
Xia Zhi-jun, Zhang Shu-lan, Zhou Zhuo
Zhonghua fu chan ke za zhi
To explore the expression and significance of ME491/CD(63) and integrin alpha5 protein and mRNA in ovarian cancer.
The expression levels of ME491/CD(63) and integrin alpha5 proteins and mRNA were evaluated by using RT-PCR and hybridization in situ (HIS) in normal ovarian tissues (G(1)), ovarian benign tumor tissues (G(2)), ovarian borderline tumor tissues (G(3)) and ovarian cancer tissues (G(4)). The expression levels of ME491/CD(63) genes and proteins were analyzed by multivariant analysis and their effects on the invasion and metastases of ovarian cancer were explored and their correlation with age at surgery, metastatic sites, operation fashions, lymph status, operation pathological staging and pathological typing was studied.
The results showed the exact biological effects of ME491/CD(63) and integrin alpha5 in ovarian cancer tissues. The tendency of two methods is coincidence on the whole. There was positive expression of ME491/CD(63) and integrin alpha5, and ME491/CD(63) mRNA expression levels were 1.7 +/- 0.3 and 1.5 +/- 0.3, and integrin alpha5 mRNA expression levels were 1.7 +/- 0.3 and 1.5 +/- 0.3 in G(1) and G(2); ME491/CD(63) is 1.1 +/- 0.5, and integrin alpha5 is 1.1 +/- 0.5 in G(3); ME491/CD(63) is 0.6 +/- 0.4, integrin alpha5 is 0.6 +/- 0.4 in G(4); There was no significant relationship between gene expression and age at surgery or clinical-pathological staging (P > 0.05). There was significant difference between G(1), G(2) and G(3) (P < 0.01), while no difference between G(1) and G(2) (P > 0.05). Low expression levels in G(4) (III, IV) were observed. Significant differences were noted between expression levels in G(4) (III, IV) and in G(2), G(3) or G(4) (I, II; P < 0.01). There was significant difference between expression levels in tissues with lymph metastases and tissues without lymph metastases (P < 0.01).
ME491/CD(63) and integrin alpha5 are lowly expressed and negatively correlated with ovarian cancer. Different expression levels exist in tissues of late ovarian cancer, earlier ovarian cancer, benign ovarian tumor and borderline tumor. The changes of two genes are correlated with tumor differentiation degree, but not pathologic typing.16322640
Immunophenotype of human adipose-derived cells: temporal changes in stromal-associated and stem cell-associated markers.
Mitchell James B, McIntosh Kevin, Zvonic Sanjin, Garrett Sara, Floyd Z Elizabeth, Kloster Amy, Di Halvorsen Yuan, Storms Robert W, Goh Brian, Kilroy Gail, Wu Xiying, Gimble Jeffrey M
Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio)
Adipose tissue represents an abundant and accessible source of multipotent adult stem cells and is used by many investigators for tissue engineering applications; however, not all laboratories use cells at equivalent stages of isolation and passage. We have compared the immunophenotype of freshly isolated human adipose tissue-derived stromal vascular fraction (SVF) cells relative to serial-passaged adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs). The initial SVF cells contained colony-forming unit fibroblasts at a frequency of 1:32. Colony-forming unit adipocytes and osteoblasts were present in the SVF cells at comparable frequencies (1:28 and 1:16, respectively). The immunophenotype of the adipose-derived cells based on flow cytometry changed progressively with adherence and passage. Stromal cell-associated markers (CD13, CD29, CD44, CD63, CD73, CD90, CD166) were initially low on SVF cells and increased significantly with successive passages. The stem cell-associated marker CD34 was at peak levels in the SVF cells and/or early-passage ASCs and remained present, although at reduced levels, throughout the culture period. Aldehyde dehydrogenase and the multidrug-resistance transport protein (ABCG2), both of which have been used to identify and characterize hematopoietic stem cells, are expressed by SVF cells and ASCs at detectable levels. Endothelial cell-associated markers (CD31, CD144 or VE-cadherin, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, von Willebrand factor) were expressed on SVF cells and did not change significantly with serial passage. Thus, the adherence to plastic and subsequent expansion of human adipose-derived cells in fetal bovine serum-supplemented medium selects for a relatively homogeneous cell population, enriching for cells expressing a stromal immunophenotype, compared with the heterogeneity of the crude SVF.16318634
Protein kinase activity is associated with CD63 in melanoma cells.
Iida Joji, Skubitz Amy P N, McCarthy James B, Skubitz Keith M
Journal of translational medicine
The tetraspan protein CD63, originally described as a stage-specific melanoma antigen but also present in a number of normal cells, regulates melanoma cell growth in nude mice, motility in serum containing media, and adhesion to several extracellular matrix proteins. CD63 has been reported to associate with beta1 and beta2 integrins, but the mechanism of signal transduction by CD63 is not clear. This study examined whether CD63 is associated with protein kinase and can transmit signals in melanoma cells.
Immunoprecipitation and radiolabeling were used to test for association of protein kinase activity with CD63. Adhesion of cells to monoclonal antibodies immobilized to microtiter plates was used to examine the ability of CD63 to transmit signals.
CD63 was capable of transmitting a signal in melanoma cells that required extracellular calcium. In the absence of extracellular calcium at the time of binding to the CD63 mAb, the cell was no longer responsive to stimulation by CD63. Immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated protein kinase activity associated with CD63, and phosphoamino acid analysis revealed that most of this protein kinase activity was due to serine kinase activity.
The current study suggests that serine protein kinase activity associated with CD63 may play a role in signaling by CD63 in melanoma cells.16308183
Defective platelet beta-N-acetyl hexosaminidase content and release in chronic myeloproliferative disorders.
Emiliani Carla, Ciferri Silvia, Mencarelli Simona, Mezzasoma Anna Maria, Momi Stefania, Orlacchio Aldo, Gresele Paolo
Platelets
Abnormalities of platelet function or structure are a hallmark of chronic myeloproliferative disorders (MPD). In vivo platelet activation with the release of alpha- and delta-granules in the circulation is one of the most frequently described alterations in MPD. Platelets contain and release upon activation also lysosomes, and in particular beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase (Hex). We have assessed whether the content and in vivo release of Hex of platelets from MPD patients is altered.
Twenty-three MPD patients were compared with 19 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. The activity of platelet beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase was measured in plasma, serum and in the capillary blood emerging from the skin wound inflicted for the measurement of the bleeding time. Lysosome integral membrane protein (LIMP or CD63), lysosome-associated membrane protein (LAMP-2 or CD107b) and P-selectin were evaluated by flow cytometry. Platelet aggregation in vitro and the release of beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase, ATP and beta-thromboglobulin were performed to study platelet reactivity.
Hex levels in plasma were significantly higher in MPD than in controls while the release of Hex in the bleeding time blood, i.e. at a localized site of in vivo platelet plug formation, was lower in MPD and the platelet content of Hex was reduced. These changes were accompanied by in vivo platelet activation. Finally, the isoenzymatic pattern of Hex was altered in platelets of MPD patients, with a reduced amount of the Hex A isoform as compared with controls.b
MPD patients present an altered platelet Hex content and release; prospective studies to assess whether altered platelet Hex is related to thrombotic/hemorrhagic complications and/or tissue fibrosis in MPD are warranted.16293978
Platelet activation markers in patients with venous thromboembolism without predisposing factors.
Gerdsen Frank, Weber Martin, Langer Florian, Eifrig Barbara, Lindhoff-Last Edelgard
Pathophysiology of haemostasis and thrombosis
A constant in vitro hypersensitivity of platelets (adenosine diphosphate) has been suggested as a risk factor for arterial and even venous thrombosis. Our aim was to determine phenotypic and functional alterations of platelets by flow cytometry as potential prothrombotic risk factors in patients with a history of unexplained spontaneous venous thrombosis. Forty-nine patients with a history of spontaneous venous thrombosis and no inherited or acquired thrombophilic risk factors were compared with a reference group of 39 healthy volunteers. Flow cytometry (FACS) was used to analyze the surface expression of CD62 (P-selectin) and CD63 in nonactivated platelets and after in vitro stimulation with adenosine diphosphate and thrombin receptor activator peptide 6. Mean fluorescence intensity of CD62 and CD63 surface expression as well as percentage of CD62 and CD63 positive cells and binding index differed in patients with a history of thrombosis compared with the reference group, but failed to reach statistical significance. Similar results were observed after in vitrostimulation with adenosine diphosphate and thrombin receptor activator peptide 6. In conclusion, the expression of CD62 and CD63 of resting and in vitro activated platelets could not be established as a risk factor for spontaneous venous thromboembolism.
Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.16288615
Histamine release during adult cardiopulmonary bypass.
Fayaz K M, Pugh S, Balachandran S, Sudheer P S, Hall J E
Anaesthesia
Histamine, an inflammatory mediator in its own right, may also be a marker for a more widespread systemic inflammatory process. In this study we have examined variations in plasma histamine concentrations produced during the course of cardiac surgery involving cardiopulmonary bypass, the relationship between these variations and intra-operative events. By assays of serum tryptase and CD-63 expression we have also attempted to identify the source of histamine. Histamine concentrations that were significantly raised from baseline level were demonstrated. These were elevated from the time of aortic cross-clamping and continued to be raised for 24 h postoperatively (p < 0.00625). This was associated with an increase in CD-63 expression (p < 0.025) (but not an increase in tryptase concentration) following aortic cross-clamping and protamine administration, suggesting that basophils are the source of histamine. 41% of patients had arrhythmias in the post bypass period. The rise in histamine levels was not related to the incidence of cardiac arrhythmias.16285565
Differential gene expression assessed by cDNA microarray analysis in breast cancer tissue under tamoxifen treatment.
del Carmen Garcia Molina Wolgien M, da Silva I D C G, Villanova F E, Yumi Otsuka A, Borra R C, Lima Reis L F, Carvalho A F, Baracat E C, Gebrim L H
European journal of gynaecological oncology
Our purpose was to identify tamoxifen (TAM) responsive genes after 30 days of TAM treatment in tumor tissues obtained from women with breast cancer using microarray expression analysis. In our study, we identified 12 candidates to be considered as tamoxifen-modulated genes. Among them, we selected two candidates the TEGT BI-1 (testis enhanced gene transcript Bax Inhibitor-1) and the CD63 gene in order to further confirm their differential expression under tamoxifen effects. We observed that both were down-regulated in tumor tissues of patients during TAM treatment. TEGT is able to inhibit the expression of Bax, which is known to promote apoptosis. On the other hand, CD63 encodes a cell membrane protein and it seems to be involved in mechanisms of platelet activation, cell adhesion and cell motility. We therefore hypothesize that TAM would be able to modulate tumor growth by down-regulating genes involved in mechanisms such as cell cycle control, tumor invasion and metastasis.16268475
Effect of nitroxyl on human platelets function.
Bermejo Emilse, Sáenz Daniel A, Alberto Fabiana, Rosenstein Ruth E, Bari Sara E, Lazzari María A
Thrombosis and haemostasis
There is a growing body of evidence on the role of nitric oxide (NO) in human platelet physiology regulation. Recently, interest has developed in the functional role of an alternative redox form of NO, namely nitroxyl (HNO/NO-), because it is formed by a number of diverse biochemical reactions. The aim of the present study was to comparatively analyze the effect of HNO and NO on several functional parameters of human platelets. For this purpose, sodium trioxodinitrate (Angeli's salt,AS) and sodium nitroprusside (SNP) were used as HNO and NO releasers, respectively. BothAS and SNP significantly inhibited platelet aggregation and ATP release induced by different agonists and adrenaline. AS or SNP did not modify the expression of platelet glycoproteins (Ib, IIb-IIIa, la-IIa, IV), whereas they substantially decreased the levels of CD62P, CD63 and of PAC-1 (a platelet activated glycoprotein IIb/IIIa epitope) after the stimulation with ADP. AS and SNP significantly increased cGMP accumulation in a 1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo [4,3-a] quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ)-sensitive manner. However, while L-cysteine reduced the effect of AS, it increased the effect of SNP on this parameter. Accordingly, a differential effect of L-cysteine was observed on the antiaggregatory effect of both compounds. In summary, these results indicate that HNO is an effective inhibitor of human platelet aggregation.16263761
Dishevelled (Dvl-2) activates canonical Wnt signalling in the absence of cytoplasmic puncta.
Smalley Matthew J, Signoret Nathalie, Robertson David, Tilley Alan, Hann Anthony, Ewan Ken, Ding Yanning, Paterson Hugh, Dale Trevor C
Journal of cell science
Dishevelled family proteins are multidomain intracellular transducers of Wnt signals. Ectopically expressed mammalian Dishevelled 2 (Dvl-2) activates downstream signalling and localises to cytoplasmic puncta. It has been suggested that these Dvl-2-containing structures correspond to intracellular vesicles and may be involved in the Wnt signal transduction process. We report that cytoplasmic puncta are primarily formed in cells expressing Dvl-2 at high levels. Lower levels of expression can activate signalling without forming puncta. The structures do not localise with markers of the early or late endocytic pathway and time-lapse analysis demonstrates that Dvl-2 puncta move in a random fashion over short distances but do not originate from the plasma membrane. Based on our findings, we propose that Dvl-2 puncta are protein aggregates that are not required for signalling.16224192
Contact urticaria to giraffe hair.
Herzinger Thomas, Scharrer Eva, Placzek Marianne, Przybilla Bernhard
International archives of allergy and immunology
Immediate-type hypersensitivity to animal proteins is a common problem in people occupationally exposed to animals.
A 19-year-old female working as a voluntary zookeeper in her off-time suffered from hives on her forearms following contact to the fur of a giraffe. For diagnostic evaluation, skin prick tests, assessment of specific serum IgE antibodies, and basophil activation tests were performed.
Skin prick tests with a standard series of common aeroallergens were positive for various pollens. Prick testing with native materials was positive for extracts of hair from two different giraffe subspecies in the patient, but not in control subjects. By CAP-FEIA, no specific serum IgE antibodies to dander of a large variety of animals were found in the patient. In the basophil activation test, expression of the activation marker CD63 was induced by extract of giraffe hair on the cells from the patient, but not on those from unaffected controls.
This patient suffers from an 'exotic' immediate-type contact allergy to giraffe hair.
Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.16210651
Nonpathogenic, environmental fungi induce activation and degranulation of human eosinophils.
Inoue Yoshinari, Matsuwaki Yoshinori, Shin Seung-Heon, Ponikau Jens U, Kita Hirohito
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Eosinophils and their products are probably important in the pathophysiology of allergic diseases, such as bronchial asthma, and in host immunity to certain organisms. An association between environmental fungal exposure and asthma has been long recognized clinically. Although products of microorganisms (e.g., lipopolysaccharides) directly activate certain inflammatory cells (e.g., macrophages), the mechanism(s) that triggers eosinophil degranulation is unknown. In this study we investigated whether human eosinophils have an innate immune response to certain fungal organisms. We incubated human eosinophils with extracts from seven environmental airborne fungi (Alternaria alternata, Aspergillus versicolor, Bipolaris sorokiniana, Candida albicans, Cladosporium herbarum, Curvularia spicifera, and Penicillium notatum). Alternaria and Penicillium induced calcium-dependent exocytosis (e.g., eosinophil-derived neurotoxin release) in eosinophils from normal individuals. Alternaria also strongly induced other activation events in eosinophils, including increases in intracellular calcium concentration, cell surface expression of CD63 and CD11b, and production of IL-8. Other fungi did not induce eosinophil degranulation, and Alternaria did not induce neutrophil activation, suggesting specificity for fungal species and cell type. The Alternaria-induced eosinophil degranulation was pertussis toxin sensitive and desensitized by preincubating cells with G protein-coupled receptor agonists, platelet-activating factor, or FMLP. The eosinophil-stimulating activity in Alternaria extract was highly heat labile and had an M(r) of approximately 60 kDa. Thus, eosinophils, but not neutrophils, possess G protein-dependent cellular activation machinery that directly responds to an Alternaria protein product(s). This innate response by eosinophils to certain environmental fungi may be important in host defense and in the exacerbation of inflammation in asthma and allergic diseases.16210410
Differential expression profiling of membrane proteins by quantitative proteomics in a human mesenchymal stem cell line undergoing osteoblast differentiation.
Foster Leonard J, Zeemann Patricia A, Li Chen, Mann Matthias, Jensen Ole Nørregaard, Kassem Moustapha
Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio)
One of the major limitations for understanding the biology of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) is the absence of prospective markers needed for distinguishing them from other cells and for monitoring lineage-specific differentiation. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has proven extremely useful for analyzing complex protein expression patterns and, when applied quantitatively, can be used to resolve subtle differences between samples. Thus, we used MS to characterize changes in expression of membrane protein markers before and after short-term induction of osteoblast (OB) differentiation in a cell model of hMSCs established by overexpression of human telomerase reverse-transcriptase gene. We identified 463 unique proteins with extremely high confidence, including all known markers of hMSCs (e.g., SH3 [CD71], SH2 [CD105], CD166, CD44, Thy1, CD29, and HOP26 [CD63]) among 148 integral membrane or membrane-anchored proteins and 159 membrane-associated proteins. Twenty-nine integrins and cell adhesion molecules, 20 receptors, and 18 Ras-related small GTPases were also identified. Upon OB differentiation, the expression levels of 83 proteins increased by at least twofold whereas the levels of another 21 decreased by at least twofold. For example, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), versican core protein, and tenascin increased 27-, 12-, and 4-fold, respectively, and fatty acid synthase decreased sixfold. The observed increases in veriscan and ALP were confirmed using immunocytochemistry and cytochemistry. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction confirmed the presence of mRNA of these membrane proteins. However, with the exception of ALP, no concordance was detected between the changes in levels of gene and protein expression during OB differentiation. In conclusion, MS-based proteomics can reveal novel markers for MSCs that can be used for their isolation and for monitoring OB differentiation.16204649
Increased CXCR4-dependent HIV-1 fusion in activated T cells: role of CD4/CXCR4 association.
Zaitseva Marina, Romantseva Tatiana, Manischewitz Jody, Wang Jiun, Goucher David, Golding Hana
Journal of leukocyte biology
Activation of peripheral CD4+ T cells resulted in augmented fusion with X4 human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) envelope-expressing cells without parallel increases in the surface expression of CD4 or CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4). Our study used biochemical methods and biological assays to correlate the increased fusion potential of activated T cells with changes in CXCR4 isoforms and CD4-CXCR4 association. Western blot analyses of CXCR4, precipitated from resting T cells, identified several CXCR4 species with molecular weights of 47, 50, 62, and 98 kDa. After 24 h stimulation with phytohemagglutinin/interleukin-2, a marked reduction was seen in the 47-kDa, with a concomitant increase in the amounts of 50 and 62-64 kDa CXCR4. T cell activation also induced an increase in the coprecipitation of CXCR4 with CD4. The 62-kDa CXCR4 predominantly coprecipitated with CD4 and was shown to be ubiquitinated. Stripping of CD4 from the cell surface with pronase treatment prior to cell lysis only partially reduced coprecipitation of CD4 with the 62-kDa CXCR4, revealing a pool of intracellular CD4-CXCR4 complexes. Coprecipitation of CXCR4 with CD4 was reduced in activated cells treated with Brefeldin A and Monensin, suggesting that late endosomes play a role in intracellular association of CXCR4 with CD4. Confocal microscopy confirmed the colocalization of CD4 and CXCR4 within CD63+ endocytic compartments. These findings demonstrated a correlation between the enhanced susceptibility of activated T cells to HIV-1 fusion and accumulation of ubiquitinated 62-64 kDa CXCR4 species, which preferentially associated with CD4. The CD4-CXCR4 complexes may shuttle between late endosomes and the cell surface.16197472
High sensitivity of basophils predicts side-effects in venom immunotherapy.
Kosnik M, Silar M, Bajrovic N, Music E, Korosec P
Allergy
Systemic side-effects of venom immunotherapy (VIT) represent a considerable problem in the treatment of patients allergic to Hymenoptera venom. We examined the hypothesis whether basophil responsiveness might be connected with the adverse reactions to VIT.
Basophil surface expression of activation marker CD63 induced by different concentrations of honeybee and wasp venom (0.1 and 1 mug/ml) was measured by flow cytometry in 34 patients with history of systemic anaphylactic reactions to Hymenoptera sting just before rush honeybee or wasp VIT.
Eleven of 34 patients had systemic anaphylactic reaction (Mueller grades I-III) and one patient a large local reaction to VIT. In those 12 patients, median percentage of activated basophils after stimulation with VIT-specific venom in concentration of 0.1 microg/ml was 99% (range: 17-195) of value reached with stimulation with 1 microg/ml. Side-effects occurred in all patients with 0.1/1 ratios over 92% (eight of 12). In contrast, in 22 patients with no side-effects, the median 0.1/1 ratio was 25% (range: 2-92). These concentration-dependent activation ratios were significantly different between the groups with and without side reactions (P < 0.0001). We also show significant positive correlation of the occurrence/clinical grade of the side-effects with individual ratios of CD63 basophil response (r = 0.73, P < 0.0001).
The results suggest that increased basophil sensitivity to allergen-specific in vitro stimulation is significantly associated with major side-effects of VIT.16194867
Elevated platelet microparticles in stable coronary artery disease are unrelated to disease severity or to indices of inflammation.
Tan Kiat T, Tayebjee Muzahir H, Macfadyen Robert J, Lip Gregory Y H, Blann Andrew D
Platelets
Platelet microparticles (PMPs), procoagulant membrane vesicles derived from activated platelets, are elevated in acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina but their relationship to inflammation and indices of coronary artery disease are unclear. We therefore hypothesised that PMPs are related to scores of coronary atheroma and/or coronary stenosis. Our study was completed by comparing PMP data with other platelet markers and with hs-CRP, marking inflammation. We recruited 54 patients attending for coronary angiography, comparing them to 35 age- and sex-matched controls. Peripheral blood was analysed for PMPs, percent platelets positive for CD62P and CD63 (all flow cytometry), soluble P selectin and hsCRP (both immunoassay). Patients exhibited higher PMPs, increased platelet %CD62P, %CD63 and soluble P selectin (all P < 0.01) and hs-CRP (P = 0.0167) than healthy controls. However, analysing only patients with an unequivocal classification, there were no significant (P </= 0.01) correlations with coronary atheroma or coronary stenosis. These findings provide no support for the hypothesis that PMPs are related to the degree of coronary artery disease and therefore may simply be a marker of widespread inappropriate platelet activity.16189265
PKC412 inhibits in vitro growth of neoplastic human mast cells expressing the D816V-mutated variant of KIT: comparison with AMN107, imatinib, and cladribine (2CdA) and evaluation of cooperative drug effects.
Gleixner Karoline V, Mayerhofer Matthias, Aichberger Karl J, Derdak Sophia, Sonneck Karoline, Böhm Alexandra, Gruze Alexander, Samorapoompichit Puchit, Manley Paul W, Fabbro Doriano, Pickl Winfried F, Sillaber Christian, Valent Peter
Blood
In most patients with systemic mastocytosis (SM), including aggressive SM and mast cell leukemia (MCL), neoplastic cells express the oncogenic KIT mutation D816V. KIT D816V is associated with constitutive tyrosine kinase (TK) activity and thus represents an attractive drug target. However, imatinib and most other TK inhibitors fail to block the TK activity of KIT D816V. We show that the novel TK-targeting drugs PKC412 and AMN107 counteract TK activity of D816V KIT and inhibit the growth of Ba/F3 cells with doxycycline-inducible expression of KIT D816V as well as the growth of primary neoplastic mast cells and HMC-1 cells harboring this KIT mutation. PKC412 was a superior agent with median inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) values of 50 to 250 nM without differences seen between HMC-1 cells exhibiting or lacking KIT D816V. By contrast, AMN107 exhibited more potent effects in KIT D816V(-) HMC-1 cells. Corresponding results were obtained with Ba/F3 cells exhibiting wild-type or D816V-mutated KIT. The growth-inhibitory effects of PKC412 and AMN107 on HMC-1 cells were associated with induction of apoptosis and down-regulation of CD2 and CD63. PKC412 was found to cooperate with AMN107, imatinib, and cladribine (2CdA) in producing growth inhibition in HMC-1, but synergistic drug interactions were observed only in cells lacking KIT D816V. Together, PKC412 and AMN107 represent promising novel agents for targeted therapy of SM.16184614
Detection of Anisakis simplex-induced basophil activation by flow cytometry.
Gonzalez-Muñoz Miguel, Luque Rosario, Nauwelaers Frans, Moneo Ignacio
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Laboratory diagnosis of anisakidosis is based on specific serum IgE detection. Recently, detection of allergen-induced basophil activation by flow cytometry has been proposed as a valuable tool for allergy diagnosis.
To evaluate if detection of Anisakis-induced basophil activation by flow cytometry is a useful tool in the diagnosis of Anisakis allergy.
Patients with Anisakis allergy (A.s.+, n = 37), patients reporting chronic urticaria or abdominal pain unrelated to fish ingestion (A.s.-, n = 51), and healthy controls (n = 12) were studied. Specific IgE to Anisakis simplex (A. simplex) was quantified with CAP-FEIA method, and basophil activation test was performed with three different concentrations of an Anisakis crude extract. Basophil gating was performed with CD123 and HLA-DR, and cellular activation was measured with CD63.
A.s.+ patients showed significantly higher age and total IgE levels than did the A.s.- patients. Specific IgE to A. simplex correlated with the activated basophil percentages obtained with 15 microg/mL (r = 0.80; P < 0.001), 1.5 microg/mL (r = 0.84; P < 0.001), and 0.15 microg/mL (r = 0.82; P < 0.001) of A. simplex crude extract. Nine individuals (3 in the A.s.+ group and 6 in the A.s.- group) were nonresponders to basophil stimulation with anti-IgE. Five A.s.- patients showed positive IgE values to A. simplex while the basophil activation test was negative. According to the receiver operating characteristics curves performed between A.s.+ vs. A.s.- and A.s.+ vs. healthy controls, the cutoff for a positive basophil activation test was >or=21% (specificity = 96%, sensitivity = 100%), and 16% (sensitivity and specificity of 100%) respectively. When nonresponders were included in the A.s.+ vs. A.s.- analysis, sensitivity decreased to 95%. Multivariate logistic analysis showed that the specific basophil activation was a factor independently associated with clinical symptoms of A. simplex allergy.
Detection of A. simplex-induced basophil activation by flow cytometry is a useful laboratory technique for the diagnosis of anisakidosis, supplementing specific IgE determinations.
(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.16179791
Cell surface membrane antigen phenotype of human gastrointestinal mast cells.
Krauth Maria-Theresa, Majlesi Yasamin, Florian Stefan, Bohm Alexandra, Hauswirth Alexander W, Ghannadan Minoo, Wimazal Friedrich, Raderer Markus, Wrba Friedrich, Valent Peter
International archives of allergy and immunology
Mast cells (MC) are important effector cells of allergic and inflammatory reactions in diverse organs. These cells interact with a number of other immune cells and structural cells in the tissues as well as with proinflammatory mediators and cytokines. The various interactions are considered to be mediated through distinct cell surface membrane receptors on MC.
In the present study, we have established the cell surface membrane phenotype of human gastrointestinal MC (HGMC) using a panel of monoclonal antibodies and indirect immunofluorescence staining techniques.
HGMC were found to react with antibodies against CD29, CD33, CD44, CD45, CD47, CD54, CD55, CD58, CD63, CD117, CD147, CD151, CD172a, and CD203c. By contrast, HGMC did not express detectable amounts of CD1, CD2, CD4, CD5, CD14, CD15, CD16, CD22, CD24, CD25, CD26, CD27, CD28, CD31, CD32, CD34, CD35, CD88, or CD116. The alpha-chain of the IL-3 receptor (CD123) was detectable neither in resting HGMC nor in HGMC exposed to stem cell factor and interleukin-4.
HGMC express a unique profile of surface antigens including the receptor for mast cell growth factor, adhesion-related molecules, and activation-linked membrane antigens.
(c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel16159640
Detection of basophil-activating IgG autoantibodies in chronic idiopathic urticaria by induction of CD 63.
De Swerdt Ann, Van Den Keybus Caroline, Kasran Ahmad, Cadot Pascal, Neyens Karen, Coorevits Lieve, Kochuyt Anne-Marie, Degreef Hugo, Ceuppens Jan L
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Approximately 40% to 50% of patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) have functional IgG autoantibodies against FcepsilonRIalpha or IgE, which induce histamine release from basophils and cutaneous mast cells. A positive autologous serum skin test response is believed to reflect the presence of these autoantibodies.
We sought to further define the functional properties of and develop a sensitive functional assay for detection of autoantibodies in patients with CIU.
Sera from patients with CIU (n=61) and sera from healthy control subjects (n=23) were incubated with donor basophils. Activation of basophils was determined on the basis of CD 63 surface expression, as analyzed on a FACScan flow cytometer.
A positive basophil activation test result was found in 51% of patients with CIU, and basophil-activating properties were present in the IgG fractions of sera. When both the in vitro test and the autologous serum skin test were considered, basophil/mast cell-activating autoantibodies were present in 62% of the patients. Patients with a positive basophil activation test result had a significantly higher prevalence of other autoantibodies, had more severe urticaria, and were more likely to have angioedema.
The results demonstrate the presence of basophil-activating autoantibodies in about 50% of patients with CIU. The data support the autoimmune cause of the disease and provide a simple test for detection of these autoantibodies.16147875
Characterization and expression profile of AmphiCD63 encoding a novel member of TM4SF proteins from amphioxus Branchiostoma belcheri tsingtauense.
Liu Zhenhui, Zhang Shicui, Li Hongyan, Luan Jing, Wang Yongjun, Wang Lei, Xiang Jianhai
DNA sequence : the journal of DNA sequencing and mapping
The study on CD antigen genes remains lacking in the cephalochordate amphioxus to date. In this report, the cDNA encoding CD63 was identified for the first time from the gut cDNA library of amphioxus Branchiostoma belcheri tsingtauense. Primary structural examination showed that the protein encoded by the cDNA contained four potential transmembrane domains characteristic of transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) proteins and a conserved CCG motif in the putative major extracellular loop. BLAST search revealed that the cDNA is closely associated with other known CD63 antigen genes, and it was thus designated AmphiCD63. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that AmphiCD63 is extremely close to vertebrate CD63, CD151 and CD53, suggesting they may have been evolved from a common ancestral gene. RT-PCR analysis exhibited that AmphiCD63 mRNA was abundant in muscle, ovary, foregut including hepatic caecum and hindgut, while it was present at considerably lower levels in notochord and gill and absent in testis.16140752
Rab9 GTPase is required for replication of human immunodeficiency virus type 1, filoviruses, and measles virus.
Murray James L, Mavrakis Manos, McDonald Natalie J, Yilla Mamadi, Sheng Jinsong, Bellini William J, Zhao Lijun, Le Doux Joseph M, Shaw Michael W, Luo Chi-Cheng, Lippincott-Schwartz Jennifer, Sanchez Anthony, Rubin Donald H, Hodge Thomas W
Journal of virology
Rab proteins and their effectors facilitate vesicular transport by tethering donor vesicles to their respective target membranes. By using gene trap insertional mutagenesis, we identified Rab9, which mediates late-endosome-to-trans-Golgi-network trafficking, among several candidate host genes whose disruption allowed the survival of Marburg virus-infected cells, suggesting that Rab9 is utilized in Marburg replication. Although Rab9 has not been implicated in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) replication, previous reports suggested that the late endosome is an initiation site for HIV assembly and that TIP47-dependent trafficking out of the late endosome to the trans-Golgi network facilitates the sorting of HIV Env into virions budding at the plasma membrane. We examined the role of Rab9 in the life cycles of HIV and several unrelated viruses, using small interfering RNA (siRNA) to silence Rab9 expression before viral infection. Silencing Rab9 expression dramatically inhibited HIV replication, as did silencing the host genes encoding TIP47, p40, and PIKfyve, which also facilitate late-endosome-to-trans-Golgi vesicular transport. In addition, silencing studies revealed that HIV replication was dependent on the expression of Rab11A, which mediates trans-Golgi-to-plasma-membrane transport, and that increased HIV Gag was sequestered in a CD63+ endocytic compartment in a cell line stably expressing Rab9 siRNA. Replication of the enveloped Ebola, Marburg, and measles viruses was inhibited with Rab9 siRNA, although the non-enveloped reovirus was insensitive to Rab9 silencing. These results suggest that Rab9 is an important cellular target for inhibiting diverse viruses and help to define a late-endosome-to-plasma-membrane vesicular transport pathway important in viral assembly.16138901
Intragranular vesiculotubular compartments are involved in piecemeal degranulation by activated human eosinophils.
Melo Rossana C N, Perez Sandra A C, Spencer Lisa A, Dvorak Ann M, Weller Peter F
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Eosinophils, leukocytes involved in allergic, inflammatory and immunoregulatory responses, have a distinct capacity to rapidly secrete preformed granule-stored proteins through piecemeal degranulation (PMD), a secretion process based on vesicular transport of proteins from within granules for extracellular release. Eosinophil-specific granules contain cytokines and cationic proteins, such as major basic protein (MBP). We evaluated structural mechanisms responsible for mobilizing proteins from within eosinophil granules. Human eosinophils stimulated for 30-60 min with eotaxin, regulated on activation, normal, T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) or platelet activating factor exhibited ultrastructural features of PMD (e.g. losses of granule contents) and extensive vesiculotubular networks within emptying granules. Brefeldin A inhibited granule emptying and collapsed intragranular vesiculotubular networks. By immunonanogold ultrastructural labelings, CD63, a tetraspanin membrane protein, was localized within granules and on vesicles outside of granules, and mobilization of MBP into vesicles within and extending from granules was demonstrated. Electron tomography with three dimension reconstructions revealed granule internal membranes to constitute an elaborate tubular network able to sequester and relocate granule products upon stimulation. We provide new insights into PMD and identify eosinophil specific granules as organelles whose internal tubulovesicular networks are important for the capacity of eosinophils to secrete, by vesicular transport, their content of preformed and granule-stored cytokines and cationic proteins.16136748
Cyclooxygenase-2 in sporadic colorectal polyps: immunohistochemical study and its importance in the early stages of colorectal tumorigenesis.
Tatsu Kazuhito, Hayashi Shinichi, Shimada Ichiroh, Matsui Kazuhiro
Pathology, research and practice
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is one of the important targets for the chemoprevention of colorectal cancer by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). To evaluate the role of COX-2 in early stages of colorectal tumorigenesis, we immunohistochemically investigated the frequency and localization of COX-2 in sporadic colorectal polyps that showed various histology using a commercially available monoclonal antibody. A total of 105 colorectal polyps were examined. These included 33 low-grade adenomas (LGAs), 28 high-grade adenomas (HGAs), 32 HGAs with p53 overexpression (HGAs-p53), and 12 cases of carcinoma in adenoma (CIA). Regarding the immunohistochemical expression of p53, MIB-1, and CD63, histological classification was made for each case. COX-2 was expressed in neoplastic epithelial cells and interstitial macrophages that were distributed mainly in the superficial areas of polyps. COX-2 labeling indices (LIs) were 8.2% in LGAs, 6.3% in HGAs, 0.9% in HGAs-p53, and 0.6% in the carcinomatous components of CIAs. COX-2 LIs were significantly higher in adenomas, including LGAs and HGAs, than in HGAs-p53 and CIAs (p < 0.001). Within CIAs, significantly higher COX-2 LIs were obtained in the adenomatous components than in the carcinomatous components (p < 0.05). The size of polyps was not correlated with COX-2 expression irrespective of their histology. The results show that COX-2 might be involved in early stages of colorectal tumorigenesis. Colorectal adenomas could be a target for the chemopreventive strategy irrespective of their sizes.16135006
Flow-assisted diagnosis of anaphylaxis to hyaluronidase.
Ebo D G, Goossens S, Opsomer F, Bridts C H, Stevens W J
Allergy
16134990
Detection of differentiation- and activation-linked cell surface antigens on cultured mast cell progenitors.
Schernthaner G-H, Hauswirth A W, Baghestanian M, Agis H, Ghannadan M, Worda C, Krauth M-T, Printz D, Fritsch G, Sperr W R, Valent P
Allergy
Mast cells (MC) are multifunctional effector cells of the immune system. They derive from uncommitted CD34(+) hemopoietic progenitor cells (HPC). Depending on the stage of maturation and the environment, MC variably express differentiation- and activation-linked antigens. Little is known, however, about the regulation of expression of such antigens in immature human MC.
We analyzed expression of CD antigens on human MC grown from cord blood-derived CD34(+) HPC. The HPC were isolated by magnetic cell sorting (MACS) and FACS to >97% purity, and were cultured in stem cell factor (SCF) and interleukin (IL)-6 with or without additional cytokines (IL-4 or IL-10) in serum-free medium. The cell surface phenotype of MC was determined by monoclonal antibodies and flow cytometry.
Cultured MC progenitors were found to react with antibodies against various CD antigens including CD58, CD63, CD117, CD147, CD151, CD203c, and CD172a, independent of the growth factors used and time-point investigated (days 14-42). CD116 [granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor alpha (GM-CSFRalpha)] and CD123 (IL-3Ralpha) were expressed on MC precursors on day 14, but disappeared thereafter. Cultured MC did not express CD2, CD3, CD5, CD10, CD19, or CD25. Addition of IL-10 to MC cultures showed no effect on expression of CD antigens. However, IL-4 was found to promote expression of CD35 and CD88 on cultured MC without changing expression of other CD antigens.
Most MC antigens may already be expressed at an early stage of mastopoiesis. Whereas IL-3R and GM-CSFRs are lost during differentiation of MC, these cells may acquire complement receptors (CD35, CD88) under the influence of distinct cytokines.16133362
Can renal oncocytoma be differentiated from its renal mimics? The utility of anti-mitochondrial, caveolin 1, CD63 and cytokeratin 14 antibodies in the differential diagnosis.
Mete Ozgur, Kilicaslan Isin, Gulluoglu Mine G, Uysal Veli
Virchows Archiv : an international journal of pathology
Among the epithelial renal tumours with eosinophilic cytoplasm, the main differential diagnostic problem arises between renal oncocytomas (ROs) and eosinophilic variants of chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (RCCs). We investigated the possible role of anti-mitochondrial (AMA), anti-caveolin 1 (CAV1), anti-CD63 (CD63) and anti-cytokeratin 14 (CK14) antibodies in the differential diagnosis of eosinophilic epithelial tumours and applied the Muller and Mowry modification of Hale's colloidal iron stain (HCI). Thirty-five ROs and 77 eosinophilic RCCs (27 chromophobe, 28 clear cell and 22 papillary RCCs) were included in this study. Apical and/or polar CD63 immunostaining (94%) and diffuse AMA (91%) and CAV1 (88%) immunostainings were the characteristics of ROs, whereas diffuse CD63 immunostaining (96%) and diffuse-peripheral AMA (96%) and CAV1 (92%) immunostainings were characteristic immunohistochemical features of eosinophilic chromophobe RCCs. We showed CK14 antibody not to be useful in the differential diagnosis of the eosinophilic epithelial renal tumours. The staining localisations with AMA, CAV1 and CD63 antibodies were significantly different between tumour groups. AMA had 96% sensitivity and 94% specificity, whereas CAV1 had 92% sensitivity and 97% specificity in diagnosing chromophobe RCCs. With HCI staining, ROs, showing apical and/or polar staining, could be differentiated from chromophobe RCCs, showing diffuse cytoplasmic staining. HCI had fairly low (69%) sensitivity and 100% specificity, whereas CD63 had 95% sensitivity and 100% specificity to diagnose ROs. We recommend using CD63 as the best marker of choice for distinguishing ROs from eosinophilic chromophobe RCCs when standard diagnostic criteria are not helpful.16131384
Soluble glycoprotein V as a quality marker of platelet concentrates stressed by transportation.
Javela Kaija, Eronen Juha, Sarna Seppo, Kekomäki Riitta
Transfusion
Despite ongoing improvements in storage conditions for platelet concentrates (PCs) for clinical use, leukoreduced platelets (PLTs) undergo subtle changes that are partly due to PLT activation. As PLTs are activated, the expression of P-selectin (CD62P) increases, and soluble glycoprotein V (sGPV) is released. GPV, part of the GPIbIXV complex, has been suggested as a marker of PLT activation.
An array of assays, used for quality control of PCs, was performed and the results were compared. The tests included PLT count, swirling, mean PLT volume, extent of shape change (ESC), hypotonic shock response (HSR), CD62P, lysosomal membrane protein (CD63), sGPV, and the metabolic tests (pH, pO(2), pCO(2), lactate, glucose). The performance of the assays was evaluated during the storage period by comparing buffy coat-derived PCs (24 PCs of 4 units) stored on flatbed agitator or stressed twice by overnight transportation.
The repeatability of all tests was good. ESC and HSR correlated with each other (r = 0.559). Importantly, there were also associations between sGPV and ESC (r = -0.564) and HSR (r = -0.389). The correlations of sGPV with lactate and glucose concentrations and with expression of CD62P and CD63 were also good. No significant changes were induced by two overnight transportations.
sGPV might be applicable for statistical process control of the quality of PCs, in addition to metabolic tests. It may also be helpful in analyzing potential improvements in blood component processing. Repeat transportation of PCs may cause minimal changes on PLT in vitro properties, if any.16120088
Functional analysis of cross-reactive immunoglobulin E antibodies: peanut-specific immunoglobulin E sensitizes basophils to tree nut allergens.
de Leon M P, Drew A C, Glaspole I N, Suphioglu C, Rolland J M, O'Hehir R E
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Peanut and tree nuts are a major cause of food-induced anaphylaxis with an appreciable mortality. Co-sensitization to peanuts and tree nuts is a common clinical observation and may be because of peanut-specific serum IgE antibodies that cross-react with tree nut allergens. It is, however, unclear whether these cross-reactive IgE antibodies are involved in effector-cell activation.
To determine if cross-reactivity of peanut-specific IgE antibodies with tree nuts can cause effector cell activation using an in vitro basophil activation assay.
Two peanut allergic subjects with positive specific IgE for peanut and tree nuts (as measured by CAP-FEIA) were studied. Basophil activation to peanut and tree nuts, as indicated by CD63 expression, was assessed by flow cytometry to confirm co-sensitization to peanut and tree nuts. Inhibition ELISA using sera from the subjects was performed to detect peanut-specific IgE antibodies that cross-reacted with tree nut proteins. To determine whether cross-reactive tree nut allergens can induce effector-cell activation, peanut-specific antibodies were affinity purified from the subject sera and used to resensitize non-peanut/tree nut allergic donor basophils stripped of surface IgE. Basophil activation was then measured following stimulation with peanut and tree nut extracts.
The two peanut allergic subjects in this study showed positive basophil activation to the peanut and tree nut extracts. Inhibition ELISA demonstrated that pre-incubation of the peanut allergic subject sera with almond, Brazil nut and hazelnut extracts inhibited IgE binding to peanut extract. IgE-stripped basophils from non-peanut/tree nut allergic subjects resensitized with affinity-purified peanut-specific antibodies from the peanut allergic subject sera became activated following stimulation with peanut, almond and Brazil nut extracts, demonstrating biological activity of cross-reactive IgE antibodies.
Peanut-specific IgE antibodies that cross-react with tree nut allergens can cause effector-cell activation and may contribute to the manifestation of tree nut allergy in peanut allergic subjects.16116595
Molecular classification of melanoma using real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Lewis Tracey B, Robison John E, Bastien Roy, Milash Brett, Boucher Ken, Samlowski Wolfram E, Leachman Sancy A, Dirk Noyes R, Wittwer Carl T, Perreard Laurent, Bernard Philip S
Cancer
The early detection and characterization of metastatic melanoma are important for prognosis and management of the disease. Molecular methods are more sensitive in detecting occult lymph node metastases compared with standard histopathology and are reported to have utility in clinical diagnostics.
Using real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction ([q]RT-PCR), the authors examined 36 samples (30 melanomas, 4 benign nevi, and 2 reactive lymph nodes) for the expression of 20 melanoma-related genes that function in cell growth and differentiation (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], WNT5A, BRAF, FOS, JUN, MATP, and TMP1), cell proliferation (KI-67, TOP2A, BUB1, BIRC5, and STK6), melanoma progression (CD63, MAGEA3, and GALGT), and melanin synthesis (TYR, MLANA, SILV, PAX3, and MITF). In addition, samples were tested for mutations in BRAF (exons 11 and 15) and NRAS (exons 2 and 3).
Hierarchical clustering analysis of the expression data was able to distinguish between the melanoma and nonmelanoma samples and further stratified the melanoma samples into two groups differentiated by high expression of the genes involved in beta-catenin activation (EGFR and WNT5A) and the MAPK/ERK pathway (BRAF, FOS, and JUN). Eighteen of the 28 patients (64%) were found to have mutations in either exon 15 of BRAF (V599 substitution) or codon 61 of NRAS. The mutations were mutually exclusive and did not appear to be associated with the different expression subtypes.
The results of the current study demonstrate that real-time qRT-PCR can be analyzed using hierarchical clustering to identify expression patterns that differentiate between melanomas and other tissue types. Using a supervised analysis of the data, the authors found that the best discriminators for molecularly distinguishing between melanoma, benign nevi, and lymph nodes were MLANA, CD63, and BUB1. These markers could have diagnostic utility for the detection of melanoma micrometastasis in sentinel lymph nodes.
Copyright 2005 American Cancer Society16107361
Increased platelet count and leucocyte-platelet complex formation in acute symptomatic compared with asymptomatic severe carotid stenosis.
McCabe D J H, Harrison P, Mackie I J, Sidhu P S, Purdy G, Lawrie A S, Watt H, Machin S J, Brown M M
Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry
The risk of stroke in patients with recently symptomatic carotid stenosis is considerably higher than in patients with asymptomatic stenosis. In the present study it was hypothesised that excessive platelet activation might partly contribute to this difference.
A full blood count was done and whole blood flow cytometry used to measure platelet surface expression of CD62P, CD63, and PAC1 binding and the percentage of leucocyte-platelet complexes in patients with acute (0-21 days, n = 19) and convalescent (79-365 days) symptomatic (n = 16) and asymptomatic (n = 16) severe (> or =70%) carotid stenosis. Most patients were treated with aspirin (37.5-300 mg daily) although alternative antithrombotic regimens were more commonly used in the symptomatic group.
The mean platelet count was higher in patients with acute and convalescent symptomatic compared with asymptomatic carotid stenosis. There were no significant differences in the median percentage expression of CD62P and CD63, or PAC1 binding between the acute or convalescent symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. The median percentages of neutrophil-platelet (p = 0.004), monocyte-platelet (p = 0.046), and lymphocyte-platelet complexes (p = 0.02) were higher in acute symptomatic than in asymptomatic patients. In patients on aspirin monotherapy, the percentages of neutrophil-platelet and monocyte-platelet complexes (p = 0.03) were higher in acute symptomatic (n = 11) than asymptomatic patients (n = 14). In the convalescent phase, the median percentages of all leucocyte-platelet complexes in the symptomatic group dropped to levels similar to those found in the asymptomatic group.
Increased platelet count and leucocyte-platelet complex formation may contribute to the early excess risk of stroke in patients with recently symptomatic carotid stenosis.16093733
5-HT2A receptor antagonist increases circulating adiponectin in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Nomura Shosaku, Shouzu Akira, Omoto Seitarou, Nishikawa Mitsushige, Iwasaka Toshiji
Blood coagulation & fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
We compared the levels of plasma adiponectin, platelet activation markers (P-selectin, CD63, PAC-1, annexin V, and platelet-derived microparticles), and endothelial injury markers (soluble E-selectin and soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1) in 53 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus to investigate potential contributions to diabetic vascular complications. In addition, we administered serotonin antagonist (sarpogrelate hydrochloride) to type 2 diabetes patients who had increased soluble E-selectin levels. The concentrations of platelet activation markers and endothelial injury markers in diabetic patients were significantly higher than those in normal subjects. However, levels of adiponectin were lower in type 2 diabetes patients than in control subjects. A total of 32 patients had high-soluble E-selectin levels (soluble E-selectin >or= 62 ng/ml); a subset of patients that also had significant elevation of platelet activation and endothelial injury markers compared with patients without high soluble E-selectin. In addition, both platelet-P-selectin and platelet-derived microparticle levels negatively correlated with the adiponectin level. Patients with high soluble E-selectin exhibited significant improvement of all markers after sarpogrelate hydrochloride treatment. These findings suggest that there is a link between vascular change in type 2 diabetes and activated platelets, endothelial dysfunction, and an adiponectin abnormality.16087369
HIV interaction with endosomes in macrophages and dendritic cells.
Kramer Beatrice, Pelchen-Matthews Annegret, Deneka Magdalena, Garcia Eduardo, Piguet Vincent, Marsh Mark
Blood cells, molecules & diseases
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is an enveloped retrovirus that undergoes assembly at specific sites in infected cells. In macrophages, at least, this assembly occurs primarily on a subset of endocytic organelles that contain some of the markers found in late endosomes or multivesicular bodies (MVBs), in particular CD63. The budding of virus particles into endosomes has many features in common with the formation of exosomes and some limited biochemical comparison of HIV-1 particles produced from macrophages with exosomes suggests that the two have similar cellular origins. Here we show that macrophages infected with HIV contain large intracellular pools of infectious virus that can be released by homogenisation of intact cells. Immunoprecipitation experiments indicate this virus has a similar complement of cellular membrane proteins to viruses that can be recovered from the extracellular medium, further suggesting that viruses released from macrophages initially bud into endosomal organelles and are then released by fusion of these organelles with the plasma membrane.16081690
Human CD8+ T cells store CXCR1 in a distinct intracellular compartment and up-regulate it rapidly to the cell surface upon activation.
Gasser Olivier, Missiou Anna, Eken Ceylan, Hess Christoph
Blood
Activation and subsequent differentiation of naive CD8+ T cells lead to the development of memory subsets with distinct homing and effector capacities. On nonlymphoid homing subsets, expression of "inflammatory" chemokine receptors (such as CXCR3, CCR5, CX3CR1, and CXCR1) is believed to promote migration into sites of infection/inflammation. Here we show that CXCR1 can be up-regulated to the cell surface within minutes of activating human CD8+ T cells. No concurrent up-regulation of other inflammatory chemokine receptors was observed. Up-regulation of CXCR1 preferentially occurred on central memory CD8+ T cells-that is, cells with a lymph node homing phenotype-and was functionally relevant. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed CXCR1 to be present in intracellular vesicles that do not significantly colocalize with perforin, RANTES (regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and secreted), or the lysosomal marker CD63. By contrast, partial colocalization with the Golgi marker GM130, the constitutive secretory pathway marker beta2-microglobulin, and the early endosome marker EEA1 was observed. Up-regulation of CXCR1 did not occur after T-cell receptor cross-linking. By contrast, supernatants from activated neutrophils, but not from monocytes or dendritic cells, induced its up-regulation. These results suggest that CD8+ T cells can rapidly adapt their homing properties by mobilizing CXCR1 from a distinct intracellular compartment.16078925
Platelet activation and residual activation potential during storage of hyperconcentrated platelet products in two different platelet additive solutions.
Vetlesen Annette, Mirlashari Mohammad Reza, Torsheim Inger Anne, Kjeldsen-Kragh Jens
Transfusion
To improve platelet (PLT) quality, hyperconcentrated PLT concentrates (hcPCs) were compared to standard PLT concentrates (stdPCs) in two different PLT additive solutions, T-Sol and PAS-27a. PAS-27a differs from T-Sol by containing glucose, phosphate, potassium, magnesium, and bicarbonate.
PLTs were harvested by apheresis twice from 14 donors; each unit was divided into two. Four units from each donor were produced: hcPCs, 2000 x 10(9) per L in T-Sol or PAS-27a; and stdPCs, 1400 x 10(9) per L in 65 percent T-Sol or PAS-27a and 35 percent acid citrate dextrose-plasma. On Days 1 through 4, swirling was scored and PLT count, mean PLT volume, pH, blood gas, glucose, and lactate were measured. Expression of CD42a, CD62P, CD63, and PAC-1 was analyzed by flow cytometry on resting PLTs and PLTs stimulated with thrombin receptor agonist peptide (TRAP).
Glucose consumption and lactate production were significantly higher in hcPCs stored in PAS-27a than in T-Sol. Both stdPC and hcPC PLTs in T-Sol expressed CD62P and PAC-1 significantly higher than in PAS-27a. Over time the T-Sol hcPCs revealed highest expression of CD62P and CD63. A significantly higher capacity for up regulation of CD62P, CD63, and PAC-1 upon TRAP stimulation was found for stdPCs and hcPCs in PAS-27a compared to PLTs in T-Sol. TRAP-stimulated PLTs in stdPCs and hcPCs suspended in PAS-27a showed significantly higher potential for down regulation of CD42a than the T-Sol concentrates.
PLTs appear better preserved in vitro in PAS-27a than in T-Sol, and this suggests that storage of hcPCs in PAS-27a could be extended beyond 24 hours.16076307
Passive IgE-sensitization by blood transfusion.
Johansson S G O, Nopp A, van Hage M, Olofsson N, Lundahl J, Wehlin L, Söderström L, Stiller V, Oman H
Allergy
To study the mechanisms of passive sensitization of patients receiving plasma containing IgE antibodies to a defined allergen.
When required for medical reasons, regular donor plasma with IgE antibodies to timothy grass allergen (8-205 kU(A)/l), was given. Kinetics of IgE antibodies in the recipients' serum and his/her basophil allergen threshold sensitivity, CD-sens, was monitored up to 2-3 weeks after transfusion. The IgE antibodies were quantitated by ImmunoCAP. The CD-sens in plasma recipients, determined by CD63 up-regulation, was measured by flow cytometry and compared to CD-sens of patients with allergic asthma and/or rhinitis.
There was a significant correlation (r = 0.98; P < 0.001) between amount of IgE antibody given and recipient serum peak concentration. The T(1/2) for IgE antibody in circulation was 1.13 days (95% confidence limit 0.35-1.91 days). The recipients became CD-sens positive already 3 h after transfusion. The CD-sens peak was observed after 3.4 days and the value were correlated (r = 0.68; P < 0.02) to the amount of IgE antibody transfused and were of the same magnitude as found in allergic patients. The T(1/2) of CD-sens indicated two populations of basophils; one with a CD-sens decrease T(1/2) of 4 days and one of 10 days.
Transfused IgE antibodies will sensitize mast cells and basophils to CD-sens levels similar to those of allergic patients. The recipients expressed 'slow' or 'rapid' CD-sens decline, indicating two different basophil populations. After transfusion of plasma with >10 kU(A)/l IgE antibody the recipient could have allergen reactive basophils for up to 7 weeks.16029026
Synthesis of 6'-O-lissamine-rhodamine B-glucosamine as a novel probe for fluorescence imaging of lysosomes in breast tumors.
Glunde Kristine, Foss Catherine A, Takagi Tomoyo, Wildes Flonne, Bhujwalla Zaver M
Bioconjugate chemistry
Lysosomes contain multiple proteases, which play a crucial role in breast cancer invasion and metastasis. Noninvasive labeling of lysosomes in breast cancer cells and solid breast tumor models is therefore useful to study lysosomal trafficking and its role in invasion. We have synthesized a novel compound, 6'-O-lissamine-rhodamine B-glucosamine, to fluorescently label lysosomes, and evaluated the compound in human breast cancer cells in cell culture or in orthotopic human breast cancer models. We demonstrated that this novel compound biosynthetically labeled lysosomal proteins following addition to cell culture medium or following intravenous injection into mouse models of breast cancer. Fluorescence from 6'-O-lissamine-rhodamine B-glucosamine colocalized with several well-established lysosomal markers, such as lysosome-associated proteins 1 and 2 (LAMP-1 and -2) and CD63. We also demonstrated the feasibility of performing in vivo fluorescence imaging of 6'-O-lissamine-rhodamine B-glucosamine to image lysosomes in human breast cancer models.16027013
Human small intestinal epithelial cells constitutively express the key elements for antigen processing and the production of exosomes.
Lin X P, Almqvist N, Telemo E
Blood cells, molecules & diseases
In humans, the small intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) have a high constitutive expression of MHC class II (MHC II), and contains lysosomes. The IEC also contains MHC II rich multivesicular compartments and has been shown to produce exosomes. This suggests a role for the IEC in antigen processing and presentation either directly or indirectly by the production of exosomes. However, the presence and localisation in the IEC of other key molecules involved in this process has not been studied previously. In the present work, we have investigated small intestinal biopsies from healthy adults and the HT29 IEC cell line with monoclonal antibodies against molecules involved in the antigen processing/presenting systems and molecules typically found on exosomes derived from professional APCs and IECs. Immunohistology was performed to study the expression and localisation of MHC II (HLA-DR), HLA-DM, MHC I (HLA-ABC), CD1d, Invariant chain, Lamp-1, CD68, CD63, B7.1, B7.2, ICAM-1, Cathepsin D/S/L and the IEC specific marker A33 in the IECs. We found that the IECs from the biopsies constitutively express MHC II, HLA-DM, MHC I, Invariant chain, Lamp-1, CD 68, CD63 and A33, and these markers were also found in the IFN-g treated HT-29 cells. All these molecules were found apically in the IECs of the biopsies, localised mainly in vesicular structures. Interestingly, in the baso-latereral area of the IEC, only MHC II, MHC I, Lamp 1, CD68, CD63 and A33 were found and also here with vesicular staining pattern which matches the molecules previously found on exosomes derived professional APCs and human IEC lines. CD1d, B7, ICAM-1, CD9 and cathepsin D and L were absent in the IEC compartment, but cathepsin S showed a relatively weak staining in the apical part of the IEC. The staining pattern and the morphological localisation of these markers suggest a prominent antigen processing/loading and trafficking compartment, and a possible baso-lateral release of exosomes in the normal human IEC.16024001
Inhibition of phospholipase D activation by CYL-26z in formyl peptide-stimulated neutrophils involves the blockade of RhoA activation.
Kuan Yu-Hsiang, Lin Ruey-Hseng, Tsao Lo-Ti, Chen Yeh-Long, Tzeng Cherng-Chyi, Wang Jih-Pyang
Biochemical pharmacology
5-[4-Acridin-9-ylamino]phenyl]-5-methyl-3-methylenedihydrofuran-2-one (CYL-26z) inhibited the formyl-Met-Leu-Phe (fMLP)-stimulated phospholipase D (PLD) activity, which was assessed by the production of phosphatidylethanol (PEt) in the presence of ethanol, in rat neutrophils (IC50 1.2+/-0.2 microM). CYL-26z caused a slight but significant attenuation of the global protein tyrosine phosphorylation stimulated by fMLP only at concentrations of CYL-26z up to 30 microM. CYL-26z blocked the membrane recruitment of protein kinase C-alpha (PKC-alpha) at concentrations of CYL-26z > or =3 microM, but failed to affect the membrane association of PKC-betaI and -betaII. The translocation of RhoA to the membrane was attenuated by CYL-26z (IC50 3.8+/-0.8 microM) in fMLP-stimulated neutrophils, whereas CYL-26z caused no significant inhibition of the membrane recruitment of ADP-ribosylation factor (Arf). CYL-26z inhibited the activation of RhoA and dissociation of the RhoA-Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (GDI) complex in fMLP-stimulated neutrophils (IC50 1.8+/-1.0 microM and 1.8+/-0.9 microM, respectively). In a cell-free system, CYL-26z effectively attenuated the membrane association of RhoA in response to GTPgammaS (IC50 1.3+/-0.5 microM). In contrast, the GTPgammaS-stimulated translocation of Arf to membrane was suppressed only at concentrations of CYL-26z up to 30 microM. CYL-26z inhibited the fMLP-stimulated membrane expression of CD11b, CD45 and CD63, and the release of lysozyme and beta-glucuronidase. These results indicate that CYL-26z inhibited the fMLP-stimulated PLD activity, mainly through the blockade of RhoA activation, and degranulation in rat neutrophils.16023874
Characterization of exosome subpopulations from RBL-2H3 cells using fluorescent lipids.
Laulagnier K, Vincent-Schneider H, Hamdi S, Subra C, Lankar D, Record M
Blood cells, molecules & diseases
Fluorescent lipid probes were used to track lipid trafficking between parent RBL cells and exosomes. We have checked the intracellular labeling of exosomes ("in vivo labeling") from parent cell incubated with either Bodipy-Cer, Bodipy-PC, or NBD-PC. Bodipy-PC labeled equally cells and exosomes, whereas Bodipy-Cer, a Golgi marker, was enriched in exosomes. Golgi membranes participated effectively in exosome biogenesis since cell incubation with brefeldin A leads to a modified phospholipid/protein ratio in exosomes. At the opposite, NBD-PC, a plasma membrane marker weakly labeled exosome membranes. Sorting of subpopulations indicated that the MHC-II containing exosomes were enriched in Bodipy-PC, whereas tetraspanin(CD 63 or CD81)-containing exosomes are essentially labeled with Bodipy-Cer and Bodipy-PC. These results indicated that RBL released two main subpopulations of exosomes that can be discriminated by their protein and lipid contents. When the bulk of exosomes was labeled after their purification ("in vitro labeling") with either of the above-mentioned lipid probes, the Bodipy-Cer was the only one to incorporate noticeably in all the subpopulations, indicating that the previous results obtained during "in vivo labeling" monitored real intracellular lipid trafficking between organelles and exosomes. Bodipy-Cer was further used as a tool to measure the respective amounts of each subpopulations. CD63, MHC II, and CD81-containing exosomes accounted for 47%, 32%, and 21%, respectively, of total exosomes.15996266
Lysis with Saponin improves detection of the response through CD203c and CD63 in the basophil activation test after crosslinking of the high affinity IgE receptor FcepsilonRI.
Hoffmann Hans Jürgen, Bøgebjerg Mette, Nielsen Lars Peter, Dahl Ronald
Clinical and molecular allergy : CMA
The basophil activation test (BAT), in which translocation of markers to the surface of blood basophils is measured in response to allergen by flow cytometry, is a rapid assay that is gaining popularity. Two markers are currently being evaluated for the BAT; CD63 and the lineage-specific CD203c. In a recent report, detection of CD203c after lysis with Saponin was shown to be superior to detection of CD63 after lysis with formic acid. We wanted to compare a) lysis with formic acid and lysis with Saponin, b) the response through CD203c and CD63, and c) the definition 10% activated cells above background with the probability binning metric T(chi) > 4, on sets of data generated with blood basophils stimulated with varying concentrations of anti-FcepsilonRI antibody.
Blood from volunteers was incubated with serial logarithmic dilutions of anti-FcepsilonRI and subsequently with antibodies to CD203c PE and CD63 FITC. Sets of samples set up in parallel were lysed with either Saponin based Whole Blood Lysing reagent or with formic acid based Immunoprep/Q-prep. Samples were acquired on a FACS Calibur, but were compensated and analysed offline. Responders were defined as persons who had 10% or more activated basophils above background, or a T(chi) > 4, for two consecutive dilutions of anti-FcepsilonRI antibody.
More basophils (median 1164 vs. median 397) and better discrimination of upregulated CD203c and CD63 amongst responders were obtained after lysis with Saponin than after lysis with formic acid. We suggest that CD203c may be a more sensitive marker for the BAT than CD63, as 6/11 responders were found with CD203c, compared with 3/11 with CD63. Most responders (7/11) were identified with probability binning.
A combination of lysis with Saponin and the markers CD203c and CD63 computed by probability binning may be the most sensitive method of detecting activation of basophils after stimulation through FcepsilonRI.15989690
The basophil activation test by flow cytometry: recent developments in clinical studies, standardization and emerging perspectives.
Boumiza Radhia, Debard Anne-Lise, Monneret Guillaume
Clinical and molecular allergy : CMA
The diagnosis of immediate allergy is mainly based upon an evocative clinical history, positive skin tests (gold standard) and, if available, detection of specific IgE. In some complicated cases, functional in vitro tests are necessary. The general concept of those tests is to mimic in vitro the contact between allergens and circulating basophils. The first approach to basophil functional responses was the histamine release test but this has remained controversial due to insufficient sensitivity and specificity. During recent years an increasing number of studies have demonstrated that flow cytometry is a reliable tool for monitoring basophil activation upon allergen challenge by detecting surface expression of degranulation/activation markers (CD63 or CD203c). This article reviews the recent improvements to the basophil activation test made possible by flow cytometry, focusing on the use of anti-CRTH2/DP2 antibodies for basophil recognition. On the basis of a new triple staining protocol, the basophil activation test has become a standardized tool for in vitro diagnosis of immediate allergy. It is also suitable for pharmacological studies on non-purified human basophils. Multicenter studies are now required for its clinical assessment in large patient populations and to define the cut-off values for clinical decision-making.15940614
Human colorectal cancer cells induce T-cell death through release of proapoptotic microvesicles: role in immune escape.
Huber Veronica, Fais Stefano, Iero Manuela, Lugini Luana, Canese Paola, Squarcina Paola, Zaccheddu Annamaria, Colone Marisa, Arancia Giuseppe, Gentile Massimo, Seregni Ettore, Valenti Roberta, Ballabio Giuseppina, Belli Filiberto, Leo Ermanno, Parmiani Giorgio, Rivoltini Licia
Gastroenterology
Normal and neoplastic cells release microvesicles, whose effects on the immune system still need to be elucidated. Because human colorectal cancer cells are hypothesized to escape immune recognition by expressing proapoptotic molecules, we investigated whether microvesicles bearing Fas ligand and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand and inducing apoptosis of activated T cells are secreted by colorectal cancer cells both in vitro and in affected patients.
Fas ligand and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand expression were analyzed in colorectal cancer cells and purified microvesicles by flow cytometry, Western blotting, and immunoelectron microscopy. Microvesicle tumor origin was assessed through simultaneous detection of lysosomal (CD63) and adenocarcinoma (carcinoembryonic antigen) markers. Proapoptotic activity of microvesicles was evaluated by annexin V/propidium iodide staining and caspase activation in T cells, including CD8+ T lymphocytes from colorectal cancer patients.
Colorectal cancer cells showed a granular pattern of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand and Fas ligand expression, suggesting a secretory behavior. These proapoptotic molecules were detected on isolated microvesicles, together with class I HLA, CD63, and carcinoembryonic antigen. Microvesicles induced Fas ligand-mediated and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-mediated apoptosis of activated CD8+ T cells generated from colorectal cancer patients. Microvesicles with comparable phenotypes and functions were found in plasma from patients with advanced disease, whereas vesicular structures expressing Fas ligand and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand were also detected in colorectal cancer specimens.
These data show that colorectal cancer induces T-cell apoptosis through the release of Fas ligand-bearing and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-bearing microvesicles both in vitro and in vivo. This mechanism of immune escape has potential implications as a prognostic factor and could be targeted for the development of new antitumor therapies in colorectal cancer patients.15936460
Increased levels of platelet-derived microparticles in patients with diabetic retinopathy.
Ogata Nahoko, Imaizumi Masahito, Nomura Shosaku, Shozu Akira, Arichi Miwa, Matsuoka Masato, Matsumura Miyo
Diabetes research and clinical practice
Diabetic retinopathy is caused by capillary occlusions. Platelet-derived microparticles (PMPs) stimulate the coagulation cascade and increase leukocyte and endothelial cell adhesions, both of which are key events in the development of diabetic retinopathy. However, the correlation between the levels of PMPs and diabetic retinopathy has not been precisely determined. The PMPs levels and the expression of platelet CD62P and CD63 were measured in 92 diabetic patients. The level of PMPs was significantly correlated with the expression of CD62P (r = 0.76, P < 0.0001) and CD63 (r = 0.71, P < 0.0001). The mean level of PMPs in diabetics (507+/-15/10(4) platelets (plt), mean+/-S.E.) was significantly higher than that in normal. The PMPs levels increased with the progression of the diabetic retinopathy; 480+/-28/10(4) plt in diabetic patients without retinopathy (n = 25), 504+/-40/10(4) plt with mild or moderate non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (n = 13), 512+/-29/10(4) plt with severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (n = 25), and 528+/-25/10(4) plt with proliferative diabetic retinopathy (n=29). The PMPs level in patients with non-perfused retinal areas (582+/-27/10(4) plt, n = 24) was significantly higher than patients without non-perfused areas (469+/-23/10(4) plt, n = 30; P = 0.0096) and without diabetic retinopathy (P = 0.024). These high correlations indicate that increased levels of PMPs may accelerate diabetic retinopathy.15936214
Development of goldfish macrophages in vitro.
Belosevic Miodrag, Hanington Patrick C, Barreda Daniel R
Fish & shellfish immunology
Over 100 years after the first description of macrophages by Metchnikoff, there are still questions as to the mechanisms leading to the heterogeneity of their lineage. Current views are based on the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) theory, where all mammalian macrophages are derived from circulating blood monocytes and ultimately from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Our studies on the regulation of fish macrophage development, suggested that teleosts have alternate pathways of monopoiesis, which undoubtedly contribute to macrophage heterogeneity in the goldfish. Macrophage heterogeneity has been attributed to a network of positive and negative regulators of macrophage development, including soluble mediators known as colony-stimulating factors of which two (M-CSF and GM-CSF) promote formation and growth of mature macrophages. In contrast to our knowledge of CSFs and their receptors in mammals, there is no published information about fish macrophage CSFs. Since fish macrophages generate their own growth factors, it is reasonable to assume that pathways of fish macrophage development and hematopoiesis may be distinct from those of mammalian macrophages. More importantly, the presence of fish progenitor/stem cells and developing macrophages in long-term cultures, allowed us to address pathways of macrophage differentiation, which could not be addressed in mammalian macrophage culture systems. Characterization of primary kidney macrophage (PKM) cultures from goldfish hematopoietic tissues (kidney) indicated that three distinct subpopulations developed in response to endogenous macrophage growth factors. These macrophage subpopulations expressed several differentiation markers, including the hematopoietic stem cell antigen AC133, c-kit, granulin, CD63, macrosialin, c/EBPbeta, legumain, and the colony-stimulating factor receptor-1 (CSF-1R). In the goldfish, there appeared to be a stringent control between those early progenitors that self-renewed, and those that were recruited into the maturation pathways. We report that upon commitment, goldfish macrophages developed through two distinct differentiation pathways: one consistent with the "classical" pathway (MPS) of macrophage development (progenitors-->monocytes-->mature macrophages), and an "alternate" pathway (AP-macrophages) where mature macrophages appeared to rapidly develop from early progenitors in the absence of an intermediate monocyte stage. AP-macrophages represent a unique subset of spontaneously growing cells. Their self-renewal was promoted by endogenous macrophage growth factors (MGF), and effectively controlled by a novel soluble form of the CSF-1R (sCSF-1R). The discovery of sCSF-1R in the goldfish highlights the inherent complexity in the hematopoietic regulatory machinery of teleosts.15931266
Aberrant expression of tetraspanin molecules in B-cell chronic lymphoproliferative disorders and its correlation with normal B-cell maturation.
Barrena S, Almeida J, Yunta M, López A, Fernández-Mosteirín N, Giralt M, Romero M, Perdiguer L, Delgado M, Orfao A, Lazo P A
Leukemia
Tetraspanin proteins form signaling complexes between them and with other membrane proteins and modulate cell adhesion and migration properties. The surface expression of several tetraspanin antigens (CD9, CD37, CD53, CD63, and CD81), and their interacting proteins (CD19, CD21, and HLA-DR) were analyzed during normal B-cell maturation and compared to a group of 67 B-cell neoplasias. Three patterns of tetraspanin expression were identified in normal B cells. The first corresponded to bone marrow CD10(+) B-cell precursors (BCP) which showed high expression of CD81 and CD9, low reactivity for CD53 and negativity for CD37. CD10(-) B-lymphocytes showed downregulation of CD9/CD81 and upregulation of CD53/CD37. Plasma cells showed re-expressed CD9 and downregulated CD37. Hierarchical clustering analysis of flow cytometry immunophenotypic data showed a good correlation between the tumor differentiation stage and the pattern of tetraspanin expression, with all analyzed individual samples classified into three major groups, independently of their normal or neoplastic origin. Despite this, neoplastic B-cells frequently showed aberrantly high/low expression of the different markers analyzed. Interestingly, in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, abnormal expression of CD53 and CD9 were associated with different patterns of disease infiltration, which would support the role of these molecules on modulating adhesion and migration of neoplastic B cells.
Leukemia (2005) 19, 1376-1383.15916720
Identification of CD13, CD107a, and CD164 as novel basophil-activation markers and dissection of two response patterns in time kinetics of IgE-dependent upregulation.
Hennersdorf Florian, Florian Stefan, Jakob Andreas, Baumgärtner Katharina, Sonneck Karoline, Nordheim Alfred, Biedermann Tilo, Valent Peter, Bühring Hans-Jörg
Cell research
Using two-colour flow cytometry >200 antibodies submitted to the 8th International Workshop of Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens (HLDA8) have been analyzed for their reactivity with resting and activated CD203c+ basophils. Four antibodies either non-reactive or weakly reactive with resting basophils exhibited an increased reactivity with basophils activated by anti-IgE-mediated cross-linking of the high affinity IgE receptor (FceRI). These include antibodies against CD164 (WS-80160, clone N6B6 and WS-80162, clone 67D2), as well as two reagents with previously unknown specificities that were identified as CD13 (WS-80274, clone A8) and CD107a (WS-80280, clone E63-880). The activation patterns followed either the "CD203c-like" or "CD63-like" activation profile. The CD203c profile is characterized by a rapid and significant upregulation (of CD13, CD164, and CD203c), reaching maximum levels after 5-15 min of stimulation. The Phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)-specific inhibitor Wortmannin inhibited the upregulation of these markers whereas 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induced a rapid and FceRI-independent upregulation within 1-2 min. In the CD63 profile, maximum upregulation (of CD63 and CD107a) was detected only after 20-40 min, and upregulation by TPA reached maximum levels after 60 min. In summary, our data identify CD13, CD107a, and CD164 as novel basophil-activation antigens. Based on time kinetics of upregulation, we hypothesize that molecules of the "CD203c group" and the "CD63 group" are linked to two different mechanisms of basophil activation.15916690
Evidence for a link between sphingolipid metabolism and expression of CD1d and MHC-class II: monocytes from Gaucher disease patients as a model.
Balreira Andrea, Lacerda Lúcia, Miranda Clara Sá, Arosa Fernando A
British journal of haematology
Gaucher disease (GD) is an autosomal recessive inherited defect of the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GluCerase) that leads to glucosylceramide (GluCer) accumulation. We previously demonstrated the existence of imbalances in certain lymphocyte populations in GD patients. We now show that GluCerase-deficient monocytes from GD patients or monocytes from healthy subjects treated with conduritol-B-epoxide (CBE), an irreversible inhibitor of GluCerase activity, display high levels of surface expression of the lipid-binding molecule CD1d. GluCerase-deficient monocytes from GD patients also showed increased surface expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-class II, but not of other lysosomal trafficking molecules, such as CD63 and MHC-class I. However, CD1d and MHC-class II mRNA levels were not increased. GluCerase-deficient monocytes from GD patients undergoing enzyme replacement therapy also exhibited increased levels of CD1d and MHC-class II and imbalances in the percentage of CD4+, CD8+, and Valpha24+ T cells. Interestingly, follow-up studies revealed that enzyme replacement therapy induced a decrease in MHC-class II expression and partial correction of the CD4+ T cell imbalances. These results reveal a new link between sphingolipid accumulation in monocytes and the expression of certain MHC molecules that may result in imbalances of regulatory T cell subsets. These immunological anomalies may contribute to the clinical heterogeneity in GD patients.15914539
Alix regulates cortical actin and the spatial distribution of endosomes.
Cabezas Alicia, Bache Kristi G, Brech Andreas, Stenmark Harald
Journal of cell science
Alix/AIP1 is a proline-rich protein that has been implicated in apoptosis, endocytic membrane trafficking and viral budding. To further elucidate the functions of Alix, we used RNA interference to specifically suppress its expression. Depletion of Alix caused a striking redistribution of early endosomes from a peripheral to a perinuclear location. The redistribution of endosomes did not affect transferrin recycling or degradation of endocytosed epidermal growth factor receptors, although the uptake of transferrin was mildly reduced when Alix was downregulated. Quantitative immunoelectron microscopy showed that multivesicular endosomes of Alix-depleted cells contained normal amounts of CD63, whereas their levels of lysobisphosphatidic acid were reduced. Alix depletion also caused an accumulation of unusual actin structures that contained clathrin and cortactin, a protein that couples membrane dynamics to the cortical actin cytoskeleton. Our results suggest that Alix functions in the actin-dependent intracellular positioning of endosomes, but that it is not essential for endocytic recycling or for trafficking of membrane proteins between early and late endosomes in non-polarised cells.15908444
Exosomal-like vesicles are present in human blood plasma.
Caby Marie-Pierre, Lankar Danielle, Vincendeau-Scherrer Claude, Raposo Graça, Bonnerot Christian
International immunology
Exosomes are small membrane vesicles (50-90 nm in diameter) secreted by most hematopoietic cells. We provide here the first evidence for the presence of exosomes in vivo, in the blood. Plasma samples of all healthy donors tested (n = 15) contain vesicles that are similar in shape, size and density to the previously described exosomes. They were clearly identified by electron microscopy after isolation by differential ultracentrifugation or immunoisolation with CD63-coated latex beads. We performed their biochemical characterization by western blot analysis and by flow cytometry after vesicle adsorption onto latex beads using a panel of mAbs. We observed that these plasma-derived vesicles contain tetraspanin molecules such as CD63, CD9, CD81 as well as class I and class II MHC molecules and Lamp-2 (i.e. proteins that are known to be enriched in exosomes). In addition, these vesicles float on sucrose gradient at a density similar to exosomes. Our results demonstrate that blood is a physiological fluid for exosome circulation in the body, suggesting their role in cell-cell or organ-organ communications as carriers for molecules that need to reach distant cell targets.15902848
Platelet microparticles and soluble P selectin in peripheral artery disease: relationship to extent of disease and platelet activation markers.
Tan Kiat T, Tayebjee Muzahir H, Lynd Cheryl, Blann Andrew D, Lip Gregory Y H
Annals of medicine
There is increased platelet activation in many cardiovascular diseases. This observation may explain the presence of increased levels of platelet microparticles (PMP) in these diseases. However, whether or not levels of PMPs inter-relate with other markers of platelet activation, such as soluble P-selectin, or with disease severity, is unknown. We therefore hypothesized raised PMP levels in stable peripheral artery disease (PAD) intermittent claudication (IC), with an additional increase in severe PAD critical limb ischaemia (CLI). Furthermore, we tested the hypothesis that PMP levels are correlated with other markers of platelet activation, such as soluble P-selectin, membrane bound P-selectin (CD62P) and 63.
Patients with PAD were recruited from the vascular outpatient and inpatient facilities at a teaching hospital. Age- and sex-matched controls were also recruited from healthy volunteers. Venous blood was obtained from 23 patients with severe disease (CLI), 36 with moderate disease (IC), and from 30 healthy controls. The percentage of platelets positive for CD62P and CD63, as well as the numbers of PMPs were defined by flow cytometry. Plasma soluble P selectin was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
PMPs were increased relative to healthy controls in patients with IC, with a further increase in CLI (P<0.001). Soluble P selectin and CD62+ve platelets were raised in both patient groups, but there was no difference amongst the two patient groups. CD63+ve cells were raised only in CLI compared to healthy controls. In multivariate analysis, only PMP and soluble P selectin independently predicted disease severity, and the two markers correlated modestly (r=0.345, P<0.001).
Increased PMP and soluble P selectin are both related to the severity of symptomatic PAD. However, it is uncertain if this relationship is a cause or effect of atherosclerosis. This finding may have clinical implications as PMPs have the potential to influence the progression of atheroma as well as promote thrombosis.15884116
Blood platelet and monocyte activations and relation to stages of liver cirrhosis.
Panasiuk Anatol, Zak Janusz, Kasprzycka Edwina, Janicka Katarzyna, Prokopowicz Danuta
World journal of gastroenterology : WJG
Blood platelets (plt) and monocytes are the cells that play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of liver damage and liver cirrhosis (LC). In this paper, the analysis of mutual relationship between platelets and monocytes activation in LC was conducted.
Immunofluorescent flow cytometry was used to measure the percentage of activated platelet populations (CD62P, CD63), the percentage of plt-monocyte aggregates (pma) (CD41/CD45), and activated monocytes (CD11b, CD14, CD16) in the blood of 20 volunteers and 40 patients with LC. Platelet activation markers: sP-selectin, platelet factor 4 (PF4), beta-thromboglobulin (betaTG) and monocyte chemotactic peptide-1 (MCP-1) were measured and compared in different stages of LC.
Platelet activation with the increase in both betaTG serum concentration and elevation of plt population (CD62P and CD63 as well as MIF CD62P and CD63) is elevated as LC develops and thrombocytopenia rises. There is a positive correlation between medial intensity of fluorescence (MIF) CD62P and MIF CD63 in LC. We did not show any relationship between monocyte activation and pma level. SP-selectin concentration correlates positively with plt count and pma, and negatively with stage of plt activation and MIF CD62P and MIF CD63. There was no correlation between MCP-1 concentration and plt, monocyte activation as well as pma level in LC. CD16 monocytes and MIF CD16 populations are significantly higher in the end stage of LC. A positive correlation occurs between the value of CD11b monocyte population and MIF CD14 and MIF CD16 on monocytes in LC.
Platelet and monocyte activation plays an important role in LC. Platelet activation stage does not influence monocyte activation and production of plt aggregates with monocytes in LC. With LC development, thrombocytopenia may be the result of plt consumption in platelet-monocyte aggregates.15883644
Enamel matrix protein interactions.
Wang HongJun, Tannukit Sissada, Zhu DanHong, Snead Malcolm L, Paine Michael L
Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research
The recognized structural proteins of the enamel matrix are amelogenin, ameloblastin, and enamelin. While a large volume of data exists showing that amelogenin self-assembles into multimeric units referred to as nanospheres, other reports of enamel matrix protein-protein interactions are scant. We believe that each of these enamel matrix proteins must interact with other organic components of ameloblasts and the enamel matrix. Likely protein partners would include integral membrane proteins and additional secreted proteins.
The purpose of this study was to identify and catalog additional proteins that play a significant role in enamel formation.
We used the yeast two-hybrid assay to identify protein partners for amelogenin, ameloblastin, and enamelin. Once identified, RT-PCR was used to assess gene transcription of these newly identified and potential "enamel" proteins in ameloblast-like LS8 cells.
In the context of this yeast assay, we identified a number of secreted proteins and integral membrane proteins that interact with amelogenin, ameloblastin, and enamelin. Additionally, proteins whose functions range from the inhibition of soft tissue mineralization, calcium ion transport, and phosphorylation events have been identified as protein partners to these enamel matrix proteins. For each protein identified using this screening strategy, future studies are planned to confirm this physiological relationship to biomineralization in vivo.
Identifying integral membrane proteins of the secretory surface of ameloblast cells (Tomes' processes) and additional enamel matrix proteins, based on their abilities to interact with the most abundant enamel matrix proteins, will better define the molecular mechanisms of enamel formation at its most rudimentary level.15882445
HIV-1 trafficking to the dendritic cell-T-cell infectious synapse uses a pathway of tetraspanin sorting to the immunological synapse.
Garcia Eduardo, Pion Marjorie, Pelchen-Matthews Annegret, Collinson Lucy, Arrighi Jean-Francois, Blot Guillaume, Leuba Florence, Escola Jean-Michel, Demaurex Nicolas, Marsh Mark, Piguet Vincent
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Dendritic cells (DCs) are essential components of the early events of HIV infection. Here, we characterized the trafficking pathways that HIV-1 follows during its capture by DCs and its subsequent presentation to CD4(+) T cells via an infectious synapse. Immunofluorescence microscopy indicates that the virus-containing compartment in mature DCs (mDCs) co-labels for the tetraspanins CD81, CD82, and CD9 but contains little CD63 or LAMP-1. Using ratio imaging of pH-reporting fluorescent virions in live DCs, we show that HIV-1 is internalized in an intracellular endocytic compartment with a pH of 6.2. Significantly, we demonstrate that the infectivity of cell-free virus is more stable at mildly acidic pH than at neutral pH. Using electron microscopy, we confirm that HIV-1 accumulates in intracellular vacuoles that contain CD81 positive internal membranes but overlaps only partially with CD63. When allowed to contact T cells, HIV-1-loaded DCs redistribute CD81, and CD9, as well as internalized HIV-1, but not the immunological synapse markers MHC-II and T-cell receptor to the infectious synapse. Together, our results indicate that HIV-1 is internalized into a non-conventional, non-lysosomal, endocytic compartment in mDCs and further suggest that HIV-1 is able to selectively subvert components of the intracellular trafficking machinery required for formation of the DC-T-cell immunological synapse to facilitate its own cell-to-cell transfer and propagation.15837731
Colocalization of the tetraspanins, CO-029 and CD151, with integrins in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma: impact on cell motility.
Gesierich Sabine, Paret Claudia, Hildebrand Dagmar, Weitz Jürgen, Zgraggen Kaspar, Schmitz-Winnenthal Friedrich H, Horejsi Vaclav, Yoshie Osamu, Herlyn Dorothee, Ashman Leonie K, Zöller Margot
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research
Patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have a poor prognosis due to the extraordinary high invasive capacity of this tumor. Altered integrin and tetraspanin expression is suggested to be an important factor. We recently reported that after protein kinase C activation, colocalization of alpha6beta4 with the tetraspanin CO-029 strongly supports migration of a rat pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The finding led us to explore whether and which integrin-tetraspanin complexes influence the motility of human pancreatic tumors.
Integrin and tetraspanin expression of pancreatic and colorectal adenocarcinoma was evaluated with emphasis on colocalization and the impact of integrin-tetraspanin associations on tumor cell motility.
The majority of pancreatic and colorectal tumors expressed the alpha2, alpha3, alpha6, beta1, and beta4 integrins and the tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD81, CD151, and CO-029. Expression of alpha6beta4 and CO-029 was restricted to tumor cells, whereas alpha1, alpha2, alpha3, alpha6, beta1, and CD9, CD81, CD151 were also expressed by the surrounding stroma. CD63, CD81, and beta1 expression was observed at comparably high levels in healthy pancreatic tissue. alpha3beta1 frequently colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated with CD9, CD81, and CD151, whereas alpha6beta4 colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated mostly with CD151 and CO-029. Notably, protein kinase C activation strengthened only the colocalization of CD151 and CO-029 with beta4 and was accompanied by internalization of the integrin-tetraspanin complex, decreased laminin 5 adhesion, and increased cell migration.
alpha6beta4 is selectively up-regulated in pancreatic and colorectal cancer. The association of alpha6beta4 with CD151 and CO-029 correlates with increased tumor cell motility.15831706
Negative regulation of platelet function by a secreted cell repulsive protein, semaphorin 3A.
Kashiwagi Hirokazu, Shiraga Masamichi, Kato Hisashi, Kamae Tsuyoshi, Yamamoto Naoko, Tadokoro Seiji, Kurata Yoshiyuki, Tomiyama Yoshiaki, Kanakura Yuzuru
Blood
Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A) is a secreted disulfide-bound homodimeric molecule that induces growth cone collapse and repulsion of axon growth in the nervous system. Recently, it has been demonstrated that Sema3A is produced by endothelial cells and inhibits integrin function in an autocrine fashion. In this study, we investigated the effects of Sema3A on platelet function by using 2 distinct human Sema3A chimera proteins. We detected expression of functional Sema3A receptors in platelets and dose-dependent and saturable binding of Sema3A to platelets. Sema3A dose-dependently inhibited activation of integrin alphaIIbbeta3 by all agonists examined including adenosine diphosphate (ADP), thrombin, convulxin, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, and A23187. Sema3A inhibited not only platelet aggregation induced by thrombin or collagen but also platelet adhesion and spreading on immobilized fibrinogen. Moreover, Sema3A impaired alphaIIbbeta3-independent spreading on glass coverslips and aggregation-independent granular secretion. Sema3A inhibited agonist-induced elevation of filamentous action (F-actin) contents, phosphorylation of cofilin, and Rac1 activation. In contrast, Sema3A did not affect the levels of cyclic nucleotides or agonist-induced increase of intracellular Ca2+ concentrations. Thus, the extensive inhibition of platelet function by Sema3A appears to be mediated, at least in part, through impairment of agonist-induced Rac1-dependent actin rearrangement.15831502
Differential kinetics of cell surface loss of von Willebrand factor and its propolypeptide after secretion from Weibel-Palade bodies in living human endothelial cells.
Hannah Matthew J, Skehel Paul, Erent Muriel, Knipe Laura, Ogden David, Carter Tom
The Journal of biological chemistry
The time course for cell surface loss of von Willebrand factor (VWF) and the propolypeptide of VWF (proregion) following exocytosis of individual Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs) from single human endothelial cells was analyzed. Chimeras of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and full-length pre-pro-VWF (VWF-EGFP) or the VWF propolypeptide (proregion-EGFP) were made and expressed in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Expression of VWF-EGFP or proregion-EGFP resulted in fluorescent rod-shaped organelles that recruited the WPB membrane markers P-selectin and CD63. The WPB secretagogue histamine evoked exocytosis of these fluorescent WPBs and extracellular release of VWF-EGFP or proregion-EGFP. Secreted VWF-EGFP formed distinctive extracellular patches of fluorescence that were labeled with an extracellular antibody to VWF. The half-time for dispersal of VWF-EGFP from extracellular patches was 323.5 +/- 146.2 s (+/-S.D., n = 20 WPBs). In contrast, secreted proregion-EGFP did not form extracellular patches but dispersed rapidly from its site of release. The half-time for dispersal of proregion-EGFP following WPB exocytosis was 2.98 +/- 1.88 s (+/-S.D., n = 32 WPBs). The slow rate of loss of VWF-EGFP is consistent with the adhesive nature of this protein for the endothelial membrane. The much faster rate of loss of proregion-EGFP indicates that this protein does not interact strongly with extracellular VWF or the endothelial membrane and consequently may not play an adhesive role at the endothelial cell surface.15829999
Benidipine improves oxidized LDL-dependent monocyte and endothelial dysfunction in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Nomura S, Shouzu A, Omoto S, Nishikawa M, Iwasaka T
Journal of human hypertension
We investigated the effects of long-term benidipine treatment on levels of monocyte and endothelial cell activation markers in hypertensive patients with (n = 28) and without (n = 10) type 2 diabetes mellitus. Benidipine, 4 mg/day, was administered for 6 months; there were no other changes in any of the patients pharmacologic regimens during benidipine treatment. Clinical and biochemical data obtained before and after benidipine administration were compared; all markers were measured by ELISA. The levels of platelet activation markers (CD62P, CD63, and PAC-1), microparticles (monocyte-derived microparticles: MDMPs, and endothelial cell-derived microparticles: EDMPs), chemokines (monocyte chemotactic peptide 1: MCP-1, regulated on activation normally T-cell expressed and secreted: RANTES) and soluble adhesion markers (soluble E-selectin and soluble ICAM-1) differed in the control and hypertension groups. In addition, levels of platelet, monocyte, and endothelial cell activation markers, microparticles, chemokines, and soluble adhesion molecules were higher in hypertensive patients than in those without type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, benidipine administration decreased the concentrations of all these markers. The effect of this drug was significant in diabetes patients with high levels of antioxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) antibody. These results suggest that benidipine is effective for the treatment of oxLDL-dependent vascular disorders in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes.15819380
Anaphylaxis to an urethral lubricant: chlorhexidine as the "hidden" allergen.
Ebo D G, Bridts C H, Stevens W J
Acta clinica Belgica
We report on a severe allergic reaction during urethral catheterisation, initially erroneously attributed to natural rubber latex (NRL). However, the negative investigations for latex, the uneventful further applications of NRL, the positive skin test and basophil activation test for chlorhexidine strongly support diagnosis of chlorhexidine anaphylaxis. This case illustrates that it is not widely appreciated that "innocent" products such as urethral lubricants may elicit serious life-threatening reactions. Careful inspection of the medical records is once again re-emphasised to be mandatory in order to avert subsequent anaphylaxis.15817881
Platelet degranulation is associated with progression of intima-media thickness of the common carotid artery in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2.
Fateh-Moghadam Suzanne, Li Zonyang, Ersel Simon, Reuter Thomas, Htun Patrik, Plöckinger Ursula, Bocksch Wolfgang, Dietz Rainer, Gawaz Meinrad
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology
Platelets play a key role in atherogenesis and thromboembolic complications in patients with type 2 diabetes.
We prospectively examined the relationship between systemic platelet activation and progression of carotid wall thickness within 1 year in 105 patients with type 2 diabetes. The intima-media thickness (IMT) of the common carotid artery was measured bilaterally at study entry and after 1 year. Platelet activation was assessed with the use of immunologic markers of platelet activation (CD62P, CD63, and CD40L) and flow cytometry. The prevalence for progression of atherosclerotic carotid disease in this population was 55.2%. We found that platelet degranulation (CD63 and CD40L) correlated with progression of IMT within 1 year (CD63: r=0.231, P=0.022; CD40L: r=0.230, P=0.029). Diabetic patients with progression of IMT had a significantly increased expression of CD63 compared with patients with stable carotid disease (mean intensity of immunofluorescence; median, interquartile range: 17.1 [12.4, 25.8] versus 11.9 [7.7, 19.8]; P=0.004). Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that degranulation of platelet CD63 is a predictor for progression of IMT independently of classical cardiovascular risk factors and hemoglobin A1c in diabetic patients (P=0.017).
Enhanced systemic platelet degranulation is associated with progression of carotid artery disease in type 2 diabetes.15817706
HLA-DO transduced in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells modulates MHC class II antigen processing.
Bellemare-Pelletier Angélique, Tremblay Jessy, Beaulieu Sylvie, Boulassel Mohamed-Rachid, Routy Jean-Pierre, Massie Bernard, Lapointe Réjean, Thibodeau Jacques
Journal of leukocyte biology
Through the regulation of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DM (DM) in B cells, HLA-DO (DO) modulates positively or negatively the presentation of specific peptides. Transduction of DO into human blood monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDC) has been proposed as a mean of modifying the peptide repertoire of major histocompatibility complex class II molecules. However, maturation of DC induced by inflammatory stimuli or possibly the adenoviral vector itself triggers acidification of vesicles and shuts down transcription of the class II transactivator gene as well as de novo biosynthesis of class II-related molecules and DM activity. In these conditions, it is unclear that transduced DO could alter the peptide repertoire. Our Western blot and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analyses revealed that human DC derived from blood monocytes express small amounts of DOalpha. Transduction of DObeta alone resulted in the accumulation of a small pool of DO in DM(+) CD63(+) vesicles and at the plasma membrane of mature DC. The cell-surface increase in class II-associated invariant chain peptide (CLIP)/class II complexes is in line with an inhibitory role of DO on DM. Cotransduction of DOalpha and DObeta only slightly increased CLIP and DO levels at the cell surface. Together with the fact that a large fraction of transduced DO remains in the endoplasmic reticulum, this suggests that DM is limiting in these conditions. DO expression did not affect a mixed lymphocyte reaction but reduced presentation of the exogenous gp100 antigen to a specific T cell clone. These results show that transduced DO modulates antigen presentation in human mature MoDC, evoking the possible use of this chaperone for immunotherapy.15815879
Losartan and simvastatin inhibit platelet activation in hypertensive patients.
Nomura Shosaku, Shouzu Akira, Omoto Seitarou, Nishikawa Mitsushige, Fukuhara Shirou, Iwasaka Toshiji
Journal of thrombosis and thrombolysis
Diabetic patients also show hypercoagulability and platelet hyperaggregability, with increased levels of platelet activation-markers such as P-selectin (CD62P) and platelet-derived microparticles. We investigated the effects of losartan and simvastatin on circulating levels of platelet activation markers, microparticles, soluble selectins, and soluble cell adhesion molecules in hypertensive and hyperlipidemic patients with or without Type 2 diabetes.
The subjects included 25 normotensive healthy controls and 41 hypertensive patients. The 41 hypertensive patients were divided into three groups: group A had hypertension and hyperlipidemia (n = 11), group B had hypertension and Type 2 diabetes (n = 14), and group C had hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes (n = 16). Losartan was administered to all of the patients at a dose of 50 mg/day for 24 weeks. In addition, simvastatin was administered to the hyperlipidemic patients at a dose of 10 mg/day for 24 weeks.
There were significant differences in the levels of CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, platelet microparticles, endothelial microparticles, sE-selectin, and sVCAM-1 between the hypertensive patients and healthy controls. These markers were all significantly increased in hypertensive and hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes. In hypertensive patients with diabetes, CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, platelet and endothelial microparticles, and soluble adhesion markers were all decreased by losartan monotherapy. The decrease of each marker in hypertensive and hyperlipidemic patients given combined therapy with losartan plus simvastatin was greater among those with than without Type 2 diabetes. Low-density lipoprotein was decreased significantly by simvastatin and was correlated with CD62P or platelet microparticles in all of the patients.
Administration of losartan plus simvastatin to hypertensive and hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes may prevent the development of cardiovascular complications caused by activated platelets and microparticles via another mechanism in addition to reduction of the blood pressure or lipid levels.15814706
Exocytosis of CTLA-4 is dependent on phospholipase D and ADP ribosylation factor-1 and stimulated during activation of regulatory T cells.
Mead Karen I, Zheng Yong, Manzotti Claire N, Perry Laura C A, Liu Michael K P, Burke Fiona, Powner Dale J, Wakelam Michael J O, Sansom David M
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
CTLA-4 is an essential protein in the regulation of T cell responses that interacts with two ligands found on the surface of APCs (CD80 and CD86). CTLA-4 is itself poorly expressed on the T cell surface and is predominantly localized to intracellular compartments. We have studied the mechanisms involved in the delivery of CTLA-4 to the cell surface using a model Chinese hamster ovary cell system and compared this with activated and regulatory human T cells. We have shown that expression of CTLA-4 at the plasma membrane (PM) is controlled by exocytosis of CTLA-4-containing vesicles and followed by rapid endocytosis. Using selective inhibitors and dominant negative mutants, we have shown that exocytosis of CTLA-4 is dependent on the activity of the GTPase ADP ribosylation factor-1 and on phospholipase D activity. CTLA-4 was identified in a perinuclear compartment overlapping with the cis-Golgi marker GM-130 but did not colocalize strongly with lysosomal markers such as CD63 and lysosome-associated membrane protein. In regulatory T cells, activation of phospholipase D was sufficient to trigger release of CTLA-4 to the PM but did not inhibit endocytosis. Taken together, these data suggest that CTLA-4 may be stored in a specialized compartment in regulatory T cells that can be triggered rapidly for deployment to the PM in a phospholipase D- and ADP ribosylation factor-1-dependent manner.15787726
In vitro function of platelet concentrates prepared after filtration of whole blood or buffy coat pools.
Turner C P, Sutherland J, Wadhwa M, Dilger P, Cardigan R
Vox sanguinis
Data on the quality of platelet concentrates (PC) produced by the buffy coat method and stored beyond 5 days in plasma are limited. We therefore evaluated the quality of PCs prepared by leucocyte depletion of whole blood (Terumo WBSP, n = 10) or a buffy coat pool (Pall Autostop, n = 10), and stored for 7 days in plasma by assessing platelet parameters and markers of platelet activation.
In both types of PC, levels of glucose decreased during storage but were not totally depleted (> 11 mM on day 7). In contrast, lactate levels increased on storage and was consistently < 20 mM throughout, with pH maintained at > 6.8 in all units. Hypotonic shock response scores were > 47% in all units at day 7. On day 1, markers of platelet activation were significantly higher in WBSP PC, but by day 7 were similar for percentage CD63+ and CD62P + (40%) with levels of platelet microparticles and annexin V binding two-fold higher in WBSP. The expression of CD61 did not alter during storage and the percentage of platelets expressing CD42b was > 88% in all units on day 7. RANTES (Regulated on activation, normal, T-cell expressed and secreted) and TGFbeta released from platelets by day 7 was < 800 ng/ml and 90 ng/ml, respectively. C3a(desarg) increased throughout storage in both types of PC, but without a commensurate increase in the terminal complex SC5b-9 or activation of factor XII.
Our data indicates that the in vitro characteristics of PCs prepared using these methods is maintained over storage for 7 days in plasma and is not associated with significant deterioration of platelet function. ONE SENTENCE SUMMARY: In vitro function of platelet concentrates prepared by either filtration of whole blood, or pooled buffy coats.15787623
Platelet activation markers in patients with heart assist device.
Dewald Oliver, Schmitz Christoph, Diem Heinz, Goehring Peter, Vetter Herbert Otto, Roell Wilhelm, Goedje Oliver, Tschoepe Diethelm, Reichart Bruno
Artificial organs
Clinical use of heart assist devices is often associated with thromboembolic complications. We hypothesized that platelets may be activated in patients receiving assist devices and examined expression of the platelet activation markers CD62, CD63, and thrombospondin using flow cytometry in eight patients with Novacor left ventricular assist system (LVAS) or Berlin Heart. Patients with end-stage heart failure had elevated expression of platelet activation markers before insertion of the assist device. While CD62 (P < 0.05) and thrombospondin expression (n.s.) decreased by the 14th postoperative day, the CD63 expression remained elevated (n.s.). A good correlation was found between CD62 and thrombospondin expression (r = 0.72). Bleeding time ex vivo indicated platelet dysfunction during the first 4 weeks after implantation. No relation between expression of platelet activation markers and bleeding time ex vivo were found. In conclusion, expression of the platelet activation markers CD62, CD63, and thrombospondin is increased in patients with end-stage heart failure before device placement and shows prolonged elevation during the assist period. Future studies in larger patient populations are necessary to identify new and specific markers of platelet activation in this clinical setting.15764817
Effect of desmopressin (DDAVP) on platelet membrane glycoprotein expression in patients with von Willebrand's disease.
Gordz S, Mrowietz C, Pindur G, Park J W, Jung F
Clinical hemorheology and microcirculation
When patients with von Willebrand's disease were given a single injection of desmopressin (0.4 microg/kg body weight), there was a considerable increase in platelet reactivity (from 0.95 +/- 0.19 to 1.44 +/- 0.42; p = 0.0033). On flow cytometry, increased glycoprotein Ib/IX expression in the platelets was found after the desmopressin injection; when phycoerythrin-marked anti-CD62 antibodies were used, the mean fluorescence rose from 428.9 +/- 56.6 to 440.7 +/- 51.4 (p = 0.0056), and from 425.9 +/- 55.0 to 437.4 +/- 53.9 (p = 0.0018) when phycoerythrin-marked anti-thrombospondin antibodies were used. Apart from the rise in the von Willebrand factor, this could explain the increased platelet reactivity. However, the surface expression of CD62, CD63 and thrombospondin on platelets did not change following the desmopressin injection.15745311
Procoagulant potential of platelet alpha granules.
Polasek J
Platelets
In this brief review of the literature it is pointed out that during platelet activation and degranulation platelet alpha granules leave the platelet interior through blebs in platelet plasma membrane and through the tips of the pseudopods, and then accumulate in the external milieu. There they undergo disintegration and secondary adhesion to the platelet plasma membranes. During their disintegration they expose their tightly packed GPIIb-IIIa complexes, annexin V stainable aminophospholipids, factor V, and the membrane markers CD62 and CD63. There is also demasking of lysosomal acid phosphatase activity and microvesicle formation. Lysosomal nature of platelet alpha granules is mentioned. It is suggested that platelet alpha granules are the sole source of platelet procoagulant activity and platelet microparticles (MP) or microvesicles (MV). The implications of this concept for antiplatelet therapy are discussed. A relationship of this process to tissue factor exposure and apoptosis is suggested.15735813
Soluble CD40L in peripheral artery disease. Relationship with disease severity, platelet markers and the effects of angioplasty.
Blann Andrew D, Tan Kiat T, Tayebjee Muzahir H, Davagnanam Indran, Moss Mark, Lip Gregory Y H
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Although soluble CD40L (sCD40L, possibly derived from platelets and pro-inflammatory in vitro) may be implicated in thrombosis and haemostasis, there are little data in peripheral artery disease (PAD). We hypothesised the following: (a) that sCD40L relates to the clinical severity of PAD; and (b) that peripheral artery angioplasty acutely raises sCD40L levels. sCD40L was compared to established platelet markers soluble P selectin, platelet microparticles and platelet surface expression of CD62 and CD63. We recruited 36 healthy controls, 33 patients with intermittent claudication (IC), and 33 with symptomatically more severe critical limb ischaemia (CLI), measuring plasma markers by ELISA and membrane markers by flow cytometry. Eleven patients with CLI subsequently underwent peripheral artery angioplasty: blood was taken before and 10 minutes after the intervention. Results show that sCD40L was raised in IC at median 68 (IQR 28-333) pg/ml and in CLI at 64 (34-282) pg/mL compared to 35 (IQR 28-55) pg/ml in the healthy controls (p=0.009). Levels were no different between IC and CLI. The same distribution pattern was present for soluble P selectin, %platelets CD62+ve and CD63+ve. sCD40L failed to correlate significantly with ABPI (p=0.264), unlike %platelets CD62+ve (p=0.0032) and CD63+ve (p=0.009). Pre-angioplasty sCD40L level of 72 (35-610) ng/ml rose to 100 ng/ml (IQR=60-237)(p=0.018) post-angioplasty. Plasma sCD40L, in addition to other platelet indices, is raised in peripheral atherosclerosis and is increased by peripheral artery angioplasty, although levels seem unrelated to clinical severity. Failure to correlate with other markers suggest the platelet may not be the sole source of sCD40L, and that other cells may contribute to plasma levels.15713985
In vitro analysis of birch-pollen-associated food allergy by use of recombinant allergens in the basophil activation test.
Erdmann S M, Sachs B, Schmidt A, Merk H F, Scheiner O, Moll-Slodowy S, Sauer I, Kwiecien R, Maderegger B, Hoffmann-Sommergruber K
International archives of allergy and immunology
Basophil activation is associated with the expression of CD63. In birch-pollen-associated food allergy to celery, carrot and apple, Bet v 1, Api g 1, Dau c 1 and Mal d 1 are major allergens. Recombinant allergens have not yet been used in the CD63-based basophil activation test (BAT).
To evaluate the feasibility of using recombinant allergens in the BAT in the diagnosis of allergy to apple, carrot and celery and to compare results with routine tests, i.e. skin prick tests (SPTs) and specific IgE.
Thirty-two patients with an oral allergy syndrome induced by apple, carrot or celery and 22 controls were studied. SPTs were performed with native foods. Specific IgE was determined by the CAP method and basophil activation by flowcytometry upon double staining with anti-IgE/anti-CD63 monoclonal antibodies after incubating with purified recombinant Bet v 1, Bet v 2, Api g 1, Dau c 1 and Mal d 1.
By the combined use of the BAT and the CAP method, sensitization to Bet v 1 and Bet v 2 was detected in 100 and 25% of all subjects, respectively. Sensitivity of specific IgE for apple, carrot and celery was 60, 70 and 75% with corresponding specificities of 64, 86 and 82%. Sensitivity of the BAT for Mal d 1, Dau c 1 and Api g 1 was 75, 65 and 75% with corresponding specificities of 68, 100 and 77%.
The BAT using recombinant allergens provides a valuable new in vitro method for the detection of sensitization to foods. Although double-blind placebo-controlled food challenges remain the gold standard to confirm food allergy, the CD63-based BAT with recombinant allergens may supplement routine tests for allergy diagnosis.
Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.15711748
CD63 modulates spreading and tyrosine phosphorylation of platelets on immobilized fibrinogen.
Israels Sara J, McMillan-Ward Eileen M
Thrombosis and haemostasis
CD63 is a member of the tetraspanin superfamily of integral membrane proteins. Present on a variety of cells, tetraspanins can form lateral associations with integrins and may act as 'organizers' of multimolecular networks that modulate integrinmediated signaling, cell morphology, motility and migration. In resting platelets, CD63 is present on the membranes of dense granules and lysosomes but relocates to the plasma membrane following platelet activation and exocytosis where it associates with the platelet integrin alphaIIBbeta3-CD9 complex and with the actin cytoskeleton in an alphaIIBbeta 3-dependent manner. D545, a monoclonal antibody directed at the second extracellular loop of CD63,was used to investigate the role of CD63 in platelet adhesion, spreading and tyrosine phosphorylation. Using immunofluorescence microscopy and confocal imaging, we have demonstrated that D545 does not alter adhesion of platelets to immobilized fibrinogen, but instead platelet spreading. In the presence of buffer or non-specific mouse IgG, activated platelets showed fully spread morphology, F-actin reorganization, redistribution of vinculin and extensive tyrosine phosphorylation, all of which were inhibited by D545. D545 also inhibited the phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase in thrombin-activated adherent platelets. These results suggest that CD63 may modulate alphaIIBbeta3-dependent cytoskeletal reorganization. To identify signaling enzymes associated with CD63 that could affect this pathway, lipid kinase assays were performed on D545 immunoprecipitates. CD63 co-immunoprecipitated with a lipid kinase which, on the basis of enzymatic properties(stimulated by nonionic detergents, inhibited by adenosine), is consistent with PI 4-kinase type II. The CD63-PI 4-kinase complex was not activation-dependent as the constituents were co-purified from both resting and activated platelets. The linkage of CD63 with PI 4-kinase may result in the recruitment of this signaling enzyme to specific membrane locations in the platelet where it influences phosphoinositide-dependent signaling and platelet spreading.15710010
Flow cytometric investigation of peri-anaesthetic anaphylaxis using CD63 and CD203c.
Sudheer P S, Hall J E, Read G F, Rowbottom A W, Williams P E
Anaesthesia
The investigation of anaphylactic reactions in the peri-operative period is difficult. Elevation of serum tryptase levels is a good indicator of an anaphylactic event but the ability of subsequent investigations to identify the drug(s) responsible for the reaction is still potentially unreliable. The aim of this study was to examine basophil activation as an investigative tool. We performed flow cytometric analysis of the expression on the cell surface of the basophil activation markers CD63 and CD203c and measured histamine release in 21 patients who were referred with possible peri-operative anaphylaxis. The sensitivity of CD63, CD203c, basophil histamine release and skin prick for the muscle relaxants was found to be 79%, 36%, 36% and 64%, respectively; the specificity was found to be 100%. These results demonstrate the difficulty in investigating the cause of an unexpected clinical event following drug administration, but the higher sensitivity of neo-expression on the cell surface of CD63 suggests that flow cytometric analysis of its neo-expression on basophils in vitro may be a diagnostic aid.15686513
Are platelets activated after a rapid, one-step density gradient centrifugation? Evidence from flow cytometric analysis.
Bagamery K, Kvell K, Barnet M, Landau R, Graham J
Clinical and laboratory haematology
This procedure describes the preparation of platelets from whole blood of healthy donors and pregnancy-induced hypertensive (PIH) patients by a rapid, one-step density gradient centrifugation, and the direct immunofluorescence staining of obtained platelets (CD63). Platelets are relatively fragile structures. Consequently, for the investigation of their biochemical properties it is recommended to isolate them by a simple method that does not damage their functional parameters and induce their activation. During platelet activation, several changes occur at the platelet surface. CD63 is the receptor for a lysosomal glycoprotein expressed in activated platelets. Currently, flow cytometry (fluorescence-activated cell sorting) is the most sensitive method to detect increased surface exposure of activation antigens on the platelet surface. The present technical note describes that compared with other whole blood flow cytometric techniques, our one-step density-gradient centrifugation method using OptiPrep can also prevent artificial, sample manipulation-related platelet activation.15686463
Prediction of haemorrhage in the early stage of acute myeloid leukaemia by flow cytometric analysis of platelet function.
Leinoe Eva Birgitte, Hoffmann Marianne Hutchings, Kjaersgaard Erik, Nielsen Joern Dalsgaard, Bergmann Olav Jonas, Klausen Tobias Wirenfeldt, Johnsen Hans Erik
British journal of haematology
Haemorrhage is often responsible for the lethal course of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Previously, multiple platelet function defects were identified by flow cytometric analysis of platelet activation markers in AML. The role of flow cytometric analysis of platelet function in characterization of prognostic markers of haemorrhage in AML patients has not been well elucidated. The objective of this prospective study was to analyse platelet function in 50 AML patients at diagnosis and to compare results with clinical bleeding score, graded by common toxicity criteria. Platelet activation markers CD62P, CD42b, CD63 and PAC-1 were analysed following in vitro activation by thrombin receptor activating peptide. The following plasma haemostasis parameters were measured: soluble P-selectin, activated partial thromboplastin time, thrombin time, prothrombin time, D-dimer, fibrinogen, and von Willebrand factor antigen. In a multivariate analysis, P-selectin (CD62P) <36 molecules of equivalent soluble fluorochrome x 10(3) (P < 0.0015) and platelet count <40 x 10(9)/l (P = 0.01) were significant predictors of haemorrhage at diagnosis. Haemorrhage at diagnosis predicted grade 3-4 haemorrhage in the first 28 d following diagnosis (P = 0.018). The presented results indicate that low P-selectin is a prognostic marker of haemorrhage in AML.15684326
Anti-CD63 antibodies suppress IgE-dependent allergic reactions in vitro and in vivo.
Kraft Stefan, Fleming Tony, Billingsley James M, Lin Shih-Yao, Jouvin Marie-Hélène, Storz Peter, Kinet Jean-Pierre
The Journal of experimental medicine
High-affinity IgE receptor (FcepsilonRI) cross-linking on mast cells (MCs) induces secretion of preformed allergy mediators (degranulation) and synthesis of lipid mediators and cytokines. Degranulation produces many symptoms of immediate-type allergic reactions and is modulated by adhesion to surfaces coated with specific extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The signals involved in this modulation are mostly unknown and their contribution to allergic reactions in vivo is unclear. Here we report the generation of monoclonal antibodies that potently suppress FcepsilonRI-induced degranulation, but not leukotriene synthesis. We identified the antibody target as the tetraspanin CD63. Tetraspanins are membrane molecules that form multimolecular complexes with a broad array of molecules including ECM protein-binding beta integrins. We found that anti-CD63 inhibits MC adhesion to fibronectin and vitronectin. Furthermore, anti-CD63 inhibits FcepsilonRI-mediated degranulation in cells adherent to those ECM proteins but not in nonadherent cells. Thus the inhibition of degranulation by anti-CD63 correlates with its effect on adhesion. In support of a mechanistic linkage between the two types of inhibition, anti-CD63 had no effect on FcepsilonRI-induced global tyrosine phosphorylation and calcium mobilization but impaired the Gab2-PI3K pathway that is known to be essential for both degranulation and adhesion. Finally, we showed that these antibodies inhibited FcepsilonRI-mediated allergic reactions in vivo. These properties raise the possibility that anti-CD63 could be used as therapeutic agents in MC-dependent diseases.15668987
Flow cytometric analysis of in vitro activated basophils, specific IgE and skin tests in the diagnosis of pollen-associated food allergy.
Ebo Didier G, Hagendorens Margo M, Bridts Chris H, Schuerwegh Annemie J, De Clerck Luc S, Stevens Wim J
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) and commercially available skin prick tests have been demonstrated to be unreliable methods to diagnose pollen-associated food allergy. To evaluate the predictive value of the basophil activation test (BAT) in pollen-associated food allergy, the apple-mediated oral allergy syndrome (OAS) in patients with birch pollinosis was chosen as a representative model.
Patients with birch pollen allergy and a history of apple-mediated OAS (OAS(+), n = 29), patients with birch allergic without OAS (OAS(-), n = 22), and healthy controls (HC, n = 10) without birch pollen allergy and OAS were included. Apple IgE was quantified by the CAP FEIA method. Skin prick tests were performed with a Jonagold apple extract. Flow cytometric analysis of basophils activated with the same Jonagold extract was based on double staining with anti-IgE/anti-CD63 monoclonal antibodies.
Comparison between OAS(+) subjects and HC showed sensitivities and specificities of 96% and 100% for apple IgE and 88% and 100% for the apple skin prick test, respectively. For the BAT, sensitivity and specificity were 100%. In contrast, when nonresponders on the BAT were considered, sensitivity decreased to 90%. In a separate analysis between OAS(+) and OAS(-) subjects, specificities decreased to 30% for apple IgE and to 80% for the apple skin test, respectively. The BAT reached a sensitivity of 88% and a specificity of 75%.
Flow cytometry-assisted quantification of in vitro basophil activation seems to be a reliable instrument in the diagnosis of this model of pollen-associated food allergy. In addition, this study reemphasizes that the specificity of diagnostic allergy tests decreases considerably when, apart from HC, control individuals with cross-reactive antibodies are included.15668187
Long-term treatment with nifedipine modulates procoagulant marker and C-C chemokine in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Nomura Shosaku, Shouzu Akira, Omoto Seitarou, Nishikawa Mitsushige, Iwasaka Toshiji
Thrombosis research
In type 2 diabetes mellitus, there is increased risk of nephropathy and cardiovascular complications and the incidence of renal failure increases in advanced stages of the disease. Nifedipine, a dihydropyridine-type calcium antagonist, improves endothelial function in hypercholesterolemia by enhancing nitric oxide function, and increases endothelial nitric oxide bioavailability by antioxidative mechanisms. We administered nifedipine, 50 mg/day, to the hypertensive patients for 12 months. There were no other changes in any of the patient's pharmacologic regimen during nifedipine treatment. Clinical and biochemical data obtained before and after nifedipine administration were compared. All markers were measured by ELISA. The levels of platelet activation markers (CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, and Annexin V), microparticles (PDMP and MDMP), RANTES and soluble adhesion markers (sP-selectin and sVCAM-1) differed in the control group and the hypertension group. The levels of these markers were also different in hypertensive patients with and without type 2 diabetes but were unchanged in patients without diabetes in comparison to the control group. However, the concentrations of MDMPs, chemokines, and soluble adhesion markers in hypertensive patients without type 2 diabetes decreased significantly following nifedipine treatment, although the level of RANTES was unchanged. Systolic blood pressure correlated with CD62P, CD63, annexin V, and RANTES levels, and diastolic blood pressure with CD62P and annexin V levels. The effect of nifedipine on platelet activation markers and C-C chemokines in the present study indicates potential effectiveness of calcium antagonist therapy for hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes.15647390
CD63 interacts with the carboxy terminus of the colonic H+-K+-ATPase to decrease [corrected] plasma membrane localization and 86Rb+ uptake.
Codina Juan, Li Jian, Dubose Thomas D
American journal of physiology. Cell physiology
The carboxy terminus (CT) of the colonic H(+)-K(+)-ATPase is required for stable assembly with the beta-subunit, translocation to the plasma membrane, and efficient function of the transporter. To identify protein-protein interactions involved in the localization and function of HKalpha(2), we selected 84 amino acids in the CT of the alpha-subunit of mouse colonic H(+)-K(+)-ATPase (CT-HKalpha(2)) as the bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen of a mouse kidney cDNA library. The longest identified clone was CD63. To characterize the interaction of CT-HKalpha(2) with CD63, recombinant CT-HKalpha(2) and CD63 were synthesized in vitro and incubated, and complexes were immunoprecipitated. CT-HKalpha(2) protein (but not CT-HKalpha(1)) coprecipitated with CD63, confirming stable assembly of HKalpha(2) with CD63. In HEK-293 transfected with HKalpha(2) plus beta(1)-Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase, suppression of CD63 by RNA interference increased cell surface expression of HKalpha(2)/NKbeta(1) and (86)Rb(+) uptake. These studies demonstrate that CD63 participates in the regulation of the abundance of the HKalpha(2)-NKbeta(1) complex in the cell membrane.15632132
Interaction of the mammalian endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) III protein hSnf7-1 with itself, membranes, and the AAA+ ATPase SKD1.
Lin Yuan, Kimpler Lisa A, Naismith Teresa V, Lauer Joshua M, Hanson Phyllis I
The Journal of biological chemistry
SKD1/VPS4B is an AAA+ (ATPase associated with a variety of cellular activities) protein involved in multivesicular body (MVB) biogenesis. In this study, we show that the impairment in MVB biogenesis caused by the ATP hydrolysis-deficient mutant SKD1(E235Q) is accompanied by assembly of a large detergent-insoluble protein complex that includes normally soluble endogenous components of mammalian endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) I and ESCRT-III complexes. Membrane-bound ESCRT-III complex has been proposed to be the substrate that recruits SKD1 to nascent MVBs. To explore this relationship, we studied interactions among the human ESCRT-III components hSnf7-1 and hVps24, membranes, and SKD1. We found that a significant portion of overexpressed hSnf7-1 associated with membranes where it formed a large protein complex that recruited SKD1 and perturbed normal MVB biogenesis. Overexpressed hVps24 also associated with membranes and perturbed endosome structure but only when fused to green fluorescent protein. Domain analysis revealed that the basic N-terminal half of hSnf7-1 localized to membranes and formed detergent-resistant polymers, some of which looked like filopodia extending into the lumen of swollen endosomes or out from the plasma membrane. The C-terminal acidic half of hSnf7-1 did not associate with membranes and was required for interaction of hSnf7-1 with SKD1. Together with earlier studies, our work suggests that a variety of ESCRT-III-containing polymers can assemble on membranes and recruit SKD1 during formation of the MVB.15625602
[Basophil activation tests in the diagnosis of drug reactions].
Erdmann S M, Ventocilla S, Moll-Slodowy S, Sauer I, Merk H F
Der Hautarzt; Zeitschrift für Dermatologie, Venerologie, und verwandte Gebiete
Over the past 10 years a number of studies on basophil activation tests (BAT) have been published which focus on their use as diagnostic methods in clarifying IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions to various allergens including drugs. These BAT are based on flow cytometric quantification of allergen- induced CD63 or CD203 expression or measurement of sulfo leukotriene release by ELISA. In the diagnosis of penicillin allergy, the combined use of the CD63-BAT and specific IgE increases sensitivity. The role of BAT in the diagnosis of non-IgE-mediated reactions to non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs remains to be clarified. This article focuses on (1) the principles of BAT, (2) technical aspects, (3) clinical applications and (4) recommendations for further development.15611341
Palmitoylation supports assembly and function of integrin-tetraspanin complexes.
Yang Xiuwei, Kovalenko Oleg V, Tang Wei, Claas Christoph, Stipp Christopher S, Hemler Martin E
The Journal of cell biology
As observed previously, tetraspanin palmitoylation promotes tetraspanin microdomain assembly. Here, we show that palmitoylated integrins (alpha3, alpha6, and beta4 subunits) and tetraspanins (CD9, CD81, and CD63) coexist in substantially overlapping complexes. Removal of beta4 palmitoylation sites markedly impaired cell spreading and signaling through p130Cas on laminin substrate. Also in palmitoylation-deficient beta4, secondary associations with tetraspanins (CD9, CD81, and CD63) were diminished and cell surface CD9 clustering was decreased, whereas core alpha6beta4-CD151 complex formation was unaltered. There is also a functional connection between CD9 and beta4 integrins, as evidenced by anti-CD9 antibody effects on beta4-dependent cell spreading. Notably, beta4 palmitoylation neither increased localization into "light membrane" fractions of sucrose gradients nor decreased solubility in nonionic detergents-hence it does not promote lipid raft association. Instead, palmitoylation of beta4 (and of the closely associated tetraspanin CD151) promotes CD151-alpha6beta4 incorporation into a network of secondary tetraspanin interactions (with CD9, CD81, CD63, etc.), which provides a novel framework for functional regulation.15610084
Effects of Helicobacter pylori eradication on platelet activation and disease recurrence in patients with acute coronary syndromes.
Elizalde J Ignasi, Pérez-Pujol Sílvia, Heras Magda, Sionis Alessandro, Casanovas Núria, Martorell Teresa, Lozano Miquel, González Julián, Escolar Ginés, Sanz Ginés, Piqué Josep M
Helicobacter
Platelet activation is consistently observed in animal models of Helicobacter pylori infection and could help to explain the alleged epidemiological association between H. pylori and coronary heart disease.
Ninety-two patients with recent acute coronary syndromes were enrolled. Helicobacter pylori-positive patients were randomized to receive a 7-day course of omeprazole, amoxycillin and metronidazole or placebos. Two months later, H. pylori status was reassessed and baseline parameters, including soluble P-selectin and platelet surface expression of CD62P, CD63 and CD41, were measured again. Patients were followed-up for 1 year or until death or readmission.
No baseline differences were observed between H. pylori-positive and -negative cases. Among H. pylori-positive patients, 18 received placebo and 31 received active medication resulting in eradication in 21 cases. No differences were observed in inflammatory parameters or platelet activation markers between patients with persistent or resolved H. pylori infection. However, coronary events recurred at 6 and 12 months, respectively, in 35% and 55% of patients with persisting H. pylori infection compared with 10% and 25% of patients in whom H. pylori was either absent or eradicated (p = .01). Only final H. pylori status [RR 3.07 (95% CI 1.35-98)] and number of coronary risk factors [RR 2.58 (95% CI 1.51-4.41)] were independent predictors of recurrence.
Infection with H. pylori does not induce significant platelet activation in patients treated for coronary disease. Helicobacter pylori-infected patients, however, may have an increased risk of recurrence of coronary events.15608437
A new combined test with flowcytometric basophil activation and determination of sulfidoleukotrienes is useful for in vitro diagnosis of hypersensitivity to aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Sanz M L, Gamboa P, de Weck A L
International archives of allergy and immunology
We assessed whether nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may provoke blood basophil activation in vitro in aspirin- and NSAID-hypersensitive patients, as detected by a flowcytometric technique using the CD63 marker--flowcytometric basophil activation test (FAST) assay--in addition to the sulfidoleukotriene (sLT) release--the cellular allergen stimulation test (CAST).
Sixty aspirin- and/or NSAID-hypersensitive patients were studied. Thirty control patients without history and negative provocation challenge were also included. The percentage of activated basophils after in vitro stimulation with NSAIDs at 3 different concentrations was evaluated by an anti-CD63 phycoerythrin conjugate (FAST assay) and the amount of sLTs released in the cell supernatant by ELISA (CAST assay).
For aspirin, the FAST indicated a sensitivity of 41.7%, a specificity of 100%, a positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 99.4%; for paracetamol 11.7 and 100%, for metamizol 15 and 100%, for diclofenac 43.3 and 93.3%, and for naproxen 54.8 and 74.1%. Many patients showed positive tests to more than 1 NSAID. When considering the first 4 NSAIDs, the global sensitivity increased to 66.7%, while the specificity remained at 93.3%. The addition of the CAST results still increased the sensitivity up to 73.3%, but with a decrease of the specificity to 71.4%.
The FAST shows a high percentage of positive reactions, which may reach 60-70% when 4 NSAIDs are tested and even 88% when the test is performed within 1 month of the last clinical drug exposure and reaction. The test has a high specificity above 90%. The addition of sLT determinations yields additional information in a few isolated cases. It is suggested that this test, when properly used, may help avoid some cumbersome and dangerous provocation challenges.15600193
[The association between platelet activity and carotid atherosclerosis].
Liang Xu, Sun Feng, Luo Linjie, Li Furong, Dai Yong
Sichuan da xue xue bao. Yi xue ban = Journal of Sichuan University. Medical science edition
To assess the relationship between platelet activity marker (CD62p, CD63) and carotid atherosclerosis (CAS) and evaluate the action of platelet activity on CAS.
One hundred and thirty-two subjects were examined with carotid ultrasound and were classified into four groups according to the severity of GAS. The patients without CAS were allocated to normal carotid artery (CA) group; the patients with intimal-medial thickness (IMT) thickened were allocated to IMT thickened group; the patients with stable carotid atherosclerotic plaque (CAP) to stable CAP group; and those with unstable carotid atherosclerotic plaque to unstable CAP group. CD62p, CD63 were measure by flow cytometry in all patients.
The serum level of CD62p was higher in the unstable CAP group as compared with that of the other three groups (P < 0.05-0.01), and the level of CD62p in the stable CAP group was higher than that of the normal CA group (P < 0.01). The serum level of CD63 in the unstable CAP group was higher than that of the normal CA group and IMT thickened group (P < 0.05) and the level of CD63 in the stable CAP group was higher than that of the normal CA group (P < 0.05). The multivariate stepwise regression analysis showed positive correlation between CD62p and CAS.15591814
Confirmation of the diagnosis of natural rubber latex allergy by the Basotest method.
Hemery Marie-Laure, Arnoux Bernard, Dhivert-Donnadieu Henriette, Rongier Monique, Barbotte Eric, Verdier Regis, Demoly Pascal
International archives of allergy and immunology
The flow cytometry CD63-based basophil activation test (Basotest has already been validated for the diagnosis of immediate-type allergy such as venom, house dust mite or cypress pollen allergies. The aim of this study was to evaluate the performance (specificity and sensitivity) of Basotest in the diagnosis of natural rubber latex allergy.
We included 46 latex allergic patients (clinical symptoms of latex allergy, positive latex skin prick tests and/or latex specific IgE) and 33 control subjects and performed Basotest on all subjects.
The sensitivity and specificity of Basotest were 84.8 and 87.9%, respectively, when we considered the theoretic cut-off at 15% of CD63-positive cells. Using ROC curves, the optimal cut-off was evaluated at 22%, for which sensitivity and specificity were 79.3 and 96.7%, respectively.
The Basotest is a reliable test in addition to clinical history and tests already validated (such as skin prick tests and specific IgE) to confirm the diagnosis of natural rubber latex allergy.15585021
Correlation between the extent of platelet activation in platelet concentrates and in vitro and in vivo parameters.
Dijkstra-Tiekstra M J, Pietersz R N I, Huijgens P C
Vox sanguinis
Platelet activation, which is necessary to stop bleeding, also occurs in vitro during the storage of platelet concentrates (PCs). However, it is unknown whether in vitro-activated platelets are able to reduce blood loss in the patient. We studied correlations between platelet activation in PCs and in vitro parameters (pH, platelet count, swirling effect, storage time). In addition, we studied the correlation between platelet activation and in vivo parameters [the volume of thorax drain fluid as a measure of blood loss, platelet count, international normalized ratio (INR), and activated partial thrombin time (APTT)] in a clinical pilot study.
White blood cell-reduced PCs prepared from five buffy coats and one plasma unit (n = 55; storage time: median, 5 days; range, 2-12 days) were sampled. Platelet activation (CD62p, CD63, CD42b), as measured by flow cytometry, pH, platelet count, swirling effect and storage time, was determined. For the in vivo pilot study, PCs (n = 21) stored for 2-7 days were also checked for the above parameters and transfused into patients (n = 21) immediately after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. The volume of thorax drain fluid was measured for up to 12 h after surgery, and the platelet count, INR and APTT were measured < 1 h and 16-24 h postsurgery.
A good correlation (r2 > 0.5) was observed between CD62p and CD63, between CD62p and CD42b, between CD62p or CD63 and pH and between CD62p or CD63 and swirling effect. Also, a significant increase in platelet activation was observed for PCs stored for > or = 8 days (mean +/- standard deviation: CD62p, 41.6 +/- 30.7; CD63, 23.8 +/- 18.6), compared to PCs stored for 2-7 days (mean +/- standard deviation: CD62p, 12.3 +/- 4.8; CD63, 10.4 +/- 3.6). No correlation (r2 < or = 0.1) was observed between platelet activation and the in vivo parameters.
Although a correlation between platelet activation and in vitro parameters was observed, no correlation was found between platelet activation and in vivo parameters. Possible explanations for this are a too low variance in platelet activation in transfused PCs, and too small a number of patients.15576378
Distinct signaling pathways are involved in leukosialin (CD43) down-regulation, membrane blebbing, and phospholipid scrambling during neutrophil apoptosis.
Nusbaum Patrick, Lainé Claudianne, Bouaouina Mohamed, Seveau Stéphanie, Cramer Elisabeth M, Masse Jean Marc, Lesavre Philippe, Halbwachs-Mecarelli Lise
The Journal of biological chemistry
Although leukosialin (CD43) membrane expression decreases during neutrophil apoptosis, the CD43 molecule, unexpectedly, is neither proteolyzed nor internalized. We thus wondered whether it could be shed on bleb-derived membrane vesicles. Membrane blebbing is a transient event, hardly appreciated during the asynchronous, spontaneous apoptosis of neutrophils. Cell pre-synchronization at 15 degrees C made it possible to observe numerous blebbing neutrophils for a short 1-h period at 37 degrees C. CD43 down-regulation co-occurred with the blebbing stage and phosphatidylserine externalization, shortly after mitochondria depolarization and before nuclear condensation. Blebs detaching from the cell body were observed by time lapse fluorescence microscopy, and the release of bleb-derived vesicles was followed by flow cytometry. Phosphatidylserine externalization required caspases and protein kinase C (PKC) but not the myosin light chain kinase (MLCK). By contrast, bleb formation and release was caspase- and PKC-independent but required an active MLCK, whereas CD43 down-regulation involved caspases but neither PKC nor MLCK. Furthermore, CD43 appeared mostly excluded from membrane blebs by electron microscopy. Thus, CD43 down-regulation does not result from the release of bleb-derived vesicles. Ultracentrifugation of apoptotic cell supernatants made it possible to recover <1 microM microparticles, which contained the entire CD43 molecule. These microparticles expressed neutrophil membrane markers such as CD11b, CD66b, and CD63, together with CD43. In conclusion, we show that the three early membrane events of apoptosis, namely blebbing, phosphatidylserine externalization, and CD43 down-regulation, result from different signaling pathways and can occur independently from one another. CD43 down-regulation results from the shedding of microparticles released during apoptosis but unrelated to the blebbing.15557209
Combined smooth muscle and melanocytic differentiation in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Zhe Xiaoning, Schuger Lucia
The journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry : official journal of the Histochemistry Society
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is characterized by abnormal proliferation of immature-looking smooth muscle (SM)-like cells (LAM cells), leading to lung destruction and cyst formation. In addition to expressing some SM markers, scattered LAM cells express the melanocytic maker gp100, which is recognized by antibody HMB45, suggesting that at least a few LAM cells may have melanocytic differentiation. Here we immunostained 26 LAM samples for several melanocyte-related proteins. These studies showed that all LAM cells express tetraspanin CD63, a melanoma-associated protein that belongs to the transmembrane 4 superfamily. The majority of LAM cells also immunoreacted with PNL2, an antibody against a yet uncharacterized melanocytic antigen. Furthermore, we examined the co-expression of PNL2 and Ki-67, an indicator of cell proliferation, and found that PNL2-positive LAM cells showed a significantly lower proliferation rate compared with their negative counterparts. Our findings shed new light on the nature of the LAM cells by demonstrating their combined SM and melanocytic differentiation and the existence of subpopulations with different proliferative potential. Furthermore, these studies provided two new antibodies useful in the diagnosis of LAM.15548418
Biosynthesis and alternate targeting of the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin L.
Collette John, Bocock Jeffrey P, Ahn Kyujeong, Chapman Richard L, Godbold Gene, Yeyeodu Susan, Erickson Ann Hart
International review of cytology
Upregulation of cathepsin L expression, whether during development or cell transformation, or mediated by ectopic expression from a plasmid, alters the targeting of the protease and thus its physiological function. Upregulated procathepsin L is targeted to small dense core vesicles and to the dense cores of multivesicular bodies, as well as to lysosomes and to the plasma membrane for selective secretion. The multivesicular vesicles resemble secretory lysosomes characterized in specialized cell types in that they are endosomes that stably store an upregulated protein and they possess the tetraspanin CD63. Morphologically the multivesicular endosomes also resemble late endosomes, but they store procathepsin L, not the active protease, and they are not the major site for LAMP-1 accumulation. Distinction between the lysosomal proenzyme and active protease thus identifies two populations of multivesicular endosomes in fibroblasts, one a storage compartment and one an enzymatically active compartment. A distinctive targeting pathway using aggregation is utilized to enrich the storage endosomes with a particular lysosomal protease that can potentially activate and be secreted.15542372
Candidate epitope identification using peptide property models: application to cancer immunotherapy.
Sung Myong-Hee, Simon Richard
Methods (San Diego, Calif.)
Peptides derived from pathogens or tumors are selectively presented by the major histocompatibility complex proteins (MHC) to the T lymphocytes. Antigenic peptide-MHC complexes on the cell surface are specifically recognized by T cells and, in conjunction with co-factor interactions, can activate the T cells to initiate the necessary immune response against the target cells. Peptides that are capable of binding to multiple MHC molecules are potential T cell epitopes for diverse human populations that may be useful in vaccine design. Bioinformatical approaches to predict MHC binding peptides can facilitate the resource-consuming effort of T cell epitope identification. We describe a new method for predicting MHC binding based on peptide property models constructed using biophysical parameters of the constituent amino acids and a training set of known binders. The models can be applied to development of anti-tumor vaccines by scanning proteins over-expressed in cancer cells for peptides that bind to a variety of MHC molecules. The complete algorithm is described and illustrated in the context of identifying candidate T cell epitopes for melanomas and breast cancers. We analyzed MART-1, S-100, MBP, and CD63 for melanoma and p53, MUC1, cyclin B1, HER-2/neu, and CEA for breast cancer. In general, proteins over-expressed in cancer cells may be identified using DNA microarray expression profiling. Comparisons of model predictions with available experimental data were assessed. The candidate epitopes identified by such a computational approach must be evaluated experimentally but the approach can provide an efficient and focused strategy for anti-cancer immunotherapy development.15536192
Intracellular localization and constitutive endocytosis of CXCR4 in human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Zhang Yanyan, Foudi Adlen, Geay Jean-François, Berthebaud Magali, Buet Dorothée, Jarrier Peggy, Jalil Abdelali, Vainchenker William, Louache Fawzia
Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio)
CXCR4, the stromal cell-derived factor-1 receptor, plays an important role in the migration of hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells. The surface and cytoplasmic expression of CXCR4 on human hematopoietic CD34(+) cells was investigated. We show that its surface expression is low, whereas a large part of CXCR4 protein is sequestered intracellularly. Using confocal microscopy, we demonstrated that CXCR4 is colocalized with EEA-1, Rab5, Rab4, and Rab11, which are localized in early and recycling endosomes. No significant colocalization of CXCR4 with lysosomal markers CD63 and Lamp-1 was detected. Using antibody feeding experiments, we report a role for CXCR4 constitutive endocytosis in subcellular localization in stably transduced UT7-CXCR4-GFP and CD34(+) cells. Agonist-independent endocytosis of CXCR4 occurs through clathrin-coated vesicles. These data implicate a constitutive endocytosis in the regulation of CXCR4 membrane expression and suggest that constitutive endocytosis may be involved in the regulation of trafficking the human hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells to and in the bone marrow microenvironment.15528334
CD63 as an activation-linked T cell costimulatory element.
Pfistershammer Katharina, Majdic Otto, Stöckl Johannes, Zlabinger Gerhard, Kirchberger Stefanie, Steinberger Peter, Knapp Walter
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Dendritic cells (DC) are unique in their capacity to either stimulate or regulate T cells, and receptor/ligand pairs on DC and T cells are critically involved in this process. In this study we present such a molecule, which was discovered by us when analyzing the functional effects of an anti-DC mAb. This mAb, 11C9, reacted strongly with DC, but only minimally with lymphocytes. In MLR it constantly reduced DC-induced T cell activation. Therefore, we assumed that mAb 11C9 primarily exerts its functions by binding to a DC-structure. This does not seem to be the case, however. Preincubation of DC with mAb 11C9 before adding T cells had no inhibitory effect on T cell responses. Retroviral expression cloning identified the 11C9 Ag as CD63. This lysosomal-associated membrane protein (LAMP-3), is only minimally expressed on resting T cells but can, as we show, quickly shift to the surface upon stimulation. Cross-linkage of that structure together with TCR-triggering induces strong T cell activation. CD63 on T cells thus represents an alternative target for mAb 11C9 with its binding to activated T cells rather than DC being responsible for the observed functional effects. This efficient CD63-mediated costimulation of T cells is characterized by pronounced induction of proliferation, strong IL-2 production and compared with CD28 enhanced T cell responsiveness to restimulation. Particularly in this latter quality CD63 clearly surpasses several other CD28-independent costimulatory pathways previously described. CD63 thus represents an activation-induced reinforcing element, whose triggering promotes sustained and efficient T cell activation and expansion.15525819
Suppressors of alpha(1,3)fucosylation identified by expression cloning in the LEC11B gain-of-function CHO mutant.
Chen Wei, Tang Jian, Stanley Pamela
Glycobiology
Factors that regulate alpha(1,3)fucosyltransferase activity are important to identify because FUT genes are up-regulated during inflammation, cancer progression, and tumor metastasis. FUT gene activation increases the expression of cell surface oncofetal antigens such as Lewis X, sialyl-Le X and VIM-2. The LEC11B gain-of-function glycosylation mutant displays these antigens and binds E-selectin because it expresses the Fut6B gene that is shown here to lie immediately downstream of the Fut6A gene. A retroviral strategy for expression cloning factors that suppress alpha(1,3)fucosylation in LEC11B cells was developed, and several cDNAs that reverted the LEC11B glycosylation phenotype were isolated. cDNAs that arose most frequently and independently encoded SLC35C2, a putative GDP-fucose transporter (also termed CGI-15 or Ovcov1); Cd63, a tetraspanin membrane protein; and Hdac5, a histone deacetylase. When transfected into LEC11B cells the SLC35C2 cDNA reduced Le X expression with no concomitant suppression of Fut6B gene transcripts. Transfection of the Cd63 cDNA induced low levels of ricin resistance and also did not suppress Fut6B gene transcripts in LEC11B. However, the Hdac5 cDNA induced ricin resistance, reduced fucosylated antigen expression, and essentially eliminated Fut6B gene transcripts. The Hdac5 cDNA isolated by expression cloning encoded the C-terminal region of hamster Hdac5. Overexpression of this partial Hdac5 cDNA or a full-length Hdac5 cDNA, suppressed Fut6B gene transcripts specifically. Thus the expression cloning strategy identified Hdac5 as a trans-acting repressor of the Chinese hamster ovary Fut6B gene and Cd63 and SLC35C2 as novel factors that suppress alpha(1,3)fucosylation by mechanisms unrelated to effects on Fut gene expression.15522097
Differential use of two AP-3-mediated pathways by lysosomal membrane proteins.
Ihrke Gudrun, Kyttälä Aija, Russell Matthew R G, Rous Brian A, Luzio J Paul
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
The adaptor protein complex AP-3 is involved in the sorting of lysosomal membrane proteins to late endosomes/lysosomes. It is unclear whether AP-3-containing vesicles form at the trans-Golgi network (TGN) or early endosomes. We have compared the trafficking routes of endolyn/CD164 and 'typical' lysosomal membrane glycoproteins (lgp120/lamp-1 and CD63/lamp-3) containing cytosolic YXXPhi-targeting motifs preceded by asparagine and glycine, respectively. Endolyn, which has a NYHTL-motif, is concentrated in lysosomes, but also occurs in endosomes and at the cell surface. We observed predominant interaction of the NYHTL-motif with the mu-subunits of AP-3 in the yeast two-hybrid system. Endolyn was mislocalized to the cell surface in AP-3-deficient pearl cells, confirming a major role of AP-3 in endolyn traffic. However, lysosomal delivery of endolyn (or a NYHTL-reporter), but not GYXXPhi-containing proteins, was practically abolished when AP-2-mediated endocytosis or traffic from early to late endosomes was inhibited in NRK and 3T3 cells. This indicates that endolyn is mostly transported along the indirect lysosomal pathway (via the cell surface), rather than directly from the TGN to late endosomes/lysosomes. Our results suggest that AP-3 mediates lysosomal sorting of some membrane proteins in early endosomes in addition to sorting of proteins with intrinsically strong AP-3-interacting lysosomal targeting motifs at the TGN.15512913
Role of beta(1)-integrins and their associated tetraspanin molecules in fibronectin-enhanced megakaryopoiesis.
Han P, Guo Xh, Story C
Cytotherapy
We have shown previously that fibronectin (FN) together with megakaryocyte (Mk) growth and development factor (MGDF) enhanced generation of Mk progenitors determined by colony-forming unit (CFU)-Mk assay. MGDF can activate beta(1)-integrins on progenitor cells and increase binding to FN. We studied the role of beta(1)-integrin-tetraspanin complexes by which FN may enhance megakaryopoiesis.
Cord blood CD34(+) cells were cultured for up to 8 days in serum-free medium containing IL-3, IL-6 and SCF with or without MGDF in the presence or absence of FN. Immunofluorescence flow cytometry was used to monitor changes in beta(1)-integrin-tetraspanin complexes. CFU-Mk assay was used to assess Mk commitment.
The cocktail of cytokines irrespective of the presence of MGDF altered the percentage expression of beta(1)-integrins CD49d and CD49e on CD34(+) cells. CD49d expression fell initially (98% to 15%) and then rose to 75%, whereas CD49e progressively increased over the 8 days of culture, from 5.4% to 22%. However, with the addition of FN, similar changes in the expression of beta(1)-integrins were observed but the expression was maintained at a higher level. MGDF and FN increased expression of tetraspanin molecules, CD63 and CD151, as well as their co-expression with the beta(1)-integrins on both the CD34(+) and CD34(-) cells (e.g. and increase from 0% to 80% co-expression of CD49d and CD151 on CD34(+)). Blocking of beta(1)-integrins or the tetraspanin CD151 with the respective MAb reduced Mk progenitor generation in a stromal cell model.
FN enhanced Mk progenitor generation through modulation of beta(1)-integrin-tetraspanin complexes, such as CD151/CD49d.15509525
Heterogeneity in primary and metastatic prostate cancer as defined by cell surface CD profile.
Liu Alvin Y, Roudier Martine P, True Lawrence D
The American journal of pathology
Cluster designation (CD) antigens are cell surface markers that can be used to identify constituent cell populations of an organ. We have previously determined the CD phenotype of normal prostate parenchymal cells and are now extending this analysis to prostate cancer. Since expression of CD antigens is associated with cellular differentiation, cancer cells may differ from their normal counterpart in their CD profile. Compared with luminal secretory cells, prostate adenocarcinoma cells are frequently negative for CD10 and CD13, express increased levels of the cell activation molecule CD24, and decreased levels of the apoptosis-associated multifunctional enzyme CD38. Expression of CD57, CD63, CD75s, CD107a, CD107b, CD164, and CD166 by cancer cells is similar to that of secretory cells. Prostate basal epithelial cells do not express the CD antigens characteristic of prostate secretory cells; and the basal cell CD markers, CD29, CD44, CD49b, CD49f, CD104, and nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR) are not expressed by cancer cells. The preferential expression of secretory cell-associated CD markers by prostate cancer cells suggests a closer lineage relationship between cancer cells and secretory cells than basal cells. Although the above cancer CD phenotype was the most frequently seen, some prostate cancers contained populations of CD10- and/or CD13-positive cells, and CD57-negative cells. Furthermore, the cancer phenotype of tumor metastasis is different. Despite its low frequency in primary tumors, CD10 is expressed by virtually all of the nodal metastases of prostate cancer. In addition, stromal fibromuscular cells associated with primary prostate cancer differ from stromal cells in benign prostate tissue by an increased level of expression of the cell activation molecule, CD90. In summary, our data show that the CD marker expression profile of prostate cancer cells most closely resembles that of secretory prostate epithelial cells and that some prostate cancers consist of heterogeneous cell populations as distinguished by CD-marker expression profiles.15504731
Peptide YY and neuropeptide Y induce villin expression, reduce adhesion, and enhance migration in small intestinal cells through the regulation of CD63, matrix metalloproteinase-3, and Cdc42 activity.
Lee Mike, Hadi Margono, Halldén Gunnel, Aponte Gregory W
The Journal of biological chemistry
Peptide YY (PYY) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) are regulatory peptides synthesized in the intestine and brain, respectively, that modify physiological functions affecting nutrient assimilation and feeding behavior. Because PYY and NPY also alter the expression of intestine-specific differentiation marker proteins and the tetraspanin CD63, which is involved in cell adhesion, we investigated whether intestinal cell differentiation could be linked to mucosal cell adhesion and migration through these peptides. PYY and NPY significantly decreased cell adhesion and increased cell migration in a dose-dependent manner prior to cell confluency in our model system, non-tumorigenic small intestinal hBRIE 380i cells. Both peptides reduced CD63 expression and CD63-dependent cell adhesion. CD63 overexpression increased and antisense CD63 cDNA decreased intestinal cell adhesion. In parallel, both PYY and NPY increased expression of matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) to a level sufficient to induce cell migration by activating the Rho GTPase Cdc42. The effects of both peptides on cell migration were blocked in cells constitutively overexpressing dominant-negative Cdc42. PYY and NPY also significantly induced the expression of the differentiation marker villin, which could be eliminated by an MMP inhibitor at a concentration that inhibits cell migration. Increased MMP-3 activity, which enhanced cell migration, also induced villin mRNA levels. Therefore, these data indicate that the alteration of adhesion and migration by PYY and NPY occurs in part by synchronous modulation of three proteins that are involved in extracellular matrix-basolateral membrane interactions, CD63, MMP-3 and Cdc42, and that PYY/NPY regulation of expression of mucosal proteins such as villin is linked to the process of cell migration and adhesion.15492003
GTP-dependent secretion from neutrophils is regulated by Cdk5.
Rosales Jesusa L, Ernst Joel D, Hallows Janice, Lee Ki-Young
The Journal of biological chemistry
We have previously shown evidence for the existence of a calcium-independent, GTP-regulated mechanism of secretion from neutrophils, but this secretory mechanism remains to be fully elucidated. Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), the various substrates of which include Munc18 and synapsin 1, has been implicated in neuronal secretion. Although the Cdk5 activator, p35, and Cdk5-p35 activity are primarily associated with neurons, we report here that p35 also exists in neutrophils and that an active Cdk5-p35 complex is present in these cells. Cdk5-p35 activity in human neutrophils is mostly localized in secretory granules, which show an increase in Cdk5-p35 level and activity upon GTP stimulation. The potent Cdk5 inhibitor, roscovitine, completely blocks GTP-stimulated granule Cdk5 activity, which accompanies lactoferrin secretion from neutrophil-specific granules. Roscovitine also inhibits GTP-induced lactoferrin secretion and surface localization of the secretion markers, CD63 and CD66b, to a certain extent. Furthermore, neutrophils from wild-type mice treated with roscovitine and neutrophils from p35(-/-) mice exhibit comparable surface expression levels of both CD63 and CD66b upon GTP stimulation. Although our data suggest that other molecules control GTP-induced secretion from neutrophils, it is clear that Cdk5-p35 is required to elicit the maximum GTP-induced secretory response. Our observation that multiple proteins in neutrophil granules serve as specific substrates of Cdk5 further supports the premise that the kinase is a key component of the GTP-regulated secretory apparatus in neutrophils.15485462
Fluorouracil induces apoptosis and surface molecule modulation of peripheral blood leukocytes.
Kimhi O, Drucker L, Neumann A, Shapiro H, Shapira J, Yarkoni S, Lahav M, Radnay J, Lishner M
Clinical and laboratory haematology
Little is known about the direct effect of chemotherapy on normal peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) or its contribution to leukopenia. We examined 5'-fluorouracil's (5FU) effect on PBL apoptosis and adhesion molecules' expression in a single-drug solid-tumor model. Possible apoptosis mediators were examined. The study included 32 colorectal cancer patients; apoptosis was determined by annexin-V binding and light-scatter morphology before and after drug infusion. CD18, CD11a, CD11b, and CD63 membranal levels were assayed by flow cytometry. Apoptosis was increased post-5FU administration in neutrophils (PMN), monocytes and lymphocytes (P < 0.05). Levels of Fas receptor and activated caspase 3 did not vary indicating that the process was not mediated by caspase 3 in the timeframe studied. Reduced CD63 on monocytes and decreased CD18 expression on PMN and non-apoptotic monocytes were observed (P < or = 0.05). CD11a,b expression did not vary. Decreased CD18 and CD63 levels were demonstrated in apoptotic and non-apoptotic PBL implying a more direct association with the drug itself.15479831
Endocytic host cell machinery plays a dominant role in intracellular trafficking of incoming human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in human placental trophoblasts.
Vidricaire Gaël, Imbeault Michael, Tremblay Michel J
Journal of virology
Vertical transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is the primary cause of infection by this retrovirus in infants. In this study, we report for the first time that there is a correlation between endocytic uptake of HIV-1 and virus gene expression in polarized trophoblasts. To shed light on the relationship between endocytosis and the fate of HIV-1 in polarized trophoblasts, the step-by-step movements of HIV-1 within the endocytic compartments were tracked by confocal imaging. Incoming virions were initially located in early endosomes. As time progressed, virions accumulated in late endosomes. HIV-1 was also found in apical recycling endosomes and at the basolateral pole. Experiments performed with indicator cells revealed that HIV-1 is recycled and transcytosed. These data indicate that the intracellular trafficking of HIV-1 upon entry into polarized human trophoblasts is a complex process which requires the active participation of the endocytic host cell machinery.15466889
Caveolin-1 and MAL are located on prostasomes secreted by the prostate cancer PC-3 cell line.
Llorente Alicia, de Marco María C, Alonso Miguel A
Journal of cell science
MAL, BENE and MAL2 are raft-associated integral membrane proteins of the MAL family of proteins involved in membrane trafficking processes. We show here that the human prostate carcinoma PC-3 cell line expresses the transcripts for the three proteins simultaneously. MAL, BENE and MAL2 co-fractionated with caveolin-1 in the raft fraction of PC-3 cells, and immunofluorescence analysis showed colocalization of these proteins with caveolin-1 in a multivesicular intracellular compartment. Markers of the Golgi apparatus, early and recycling endosomes and lipid droplets were excluded from this compartment. Prostate epithelial cells contain vesicular organelles enriched in raft components named prostasomes that are secreted in the prostate fluid. Interestingly, the prostasome fraction isolated from the culture supernatant of PC-3 cells consisted mainly of 30-130 nm cup-shaped vesicles that were positive for MAL, caveolin-1 and CD59, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein previously found in prostasomes. CD63, an integral membrane protein found in multivesicular bodies/lysosomes and secretory granules was also found in PC-3 cell-derived prostasomes. Prostasome secretion was not inhibited by brefeldin A, a compound that blocks the conventional secretory pathway. However, wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, reduced the secretion of prostasomes in PC-3 cells. Our results suggest that MAL family proteins are associated with caveolin-1 in a multivesicular compartment that may be involved in prostasomal secretion in PC-3 cells.15389573
Immunophenotypic analysis of human articular chondrocytes: changes in surface markers associated with cell expansion in monolayer culture.
Diaz-Romero Jose, Gaillard Jean Philippe, Grogan Shawn Patrick, Nesic Dobrila, Trub Thomas, Mainil-Varlet Pierre
Journal of cellular physiology
Cartilage tissue engineering relies on in vitro expansion of primary chondrocytes. Monolayer is the chosen culture model for chondrocyte expansion because in this system the proliferative capacity of chondrocytes is substantially higher compared to non-adherent systems. However, human articular chondrocytes (HACs) cultured as monolayers undergo changes in phenotype and gene expression known as "dedifferentiation." To gain a better understanding of the cellular mechanisms involved in the dedifferentiation process, our research focused on the characterization of the surface molecule phenotype of HACs in monolayer culture. Adult HACs were isolated by enzymatic digestion of cartilage samples obtained post-mortem. HACs cultured in monolayer for different time periods were analyzed by flow cytometry for the expression of cell surface markers with a panel of 52 antibodies. Our results show that HACs express surface molecules belonging to different categories: integrins and other adhesion molecules (CD49a, CD49b, CD49c, CD49e, CD49f, CD51/61, CD54, CD106, CD166, CD58, CD44), tetraspanins (CD9, CD63, CD81, CD82, CD151), receptors (CD105, CD119, CD130, CD140a, CD221, CD95, CD120a, CD71, CD14), ectoenzymes (CD10, CD26), and other surface molecules (CD90, CD99). Moreover, differential expression of certain markers in monolayer culture was identified. Up-regulation of markers on HACs regarded as distinctive for mesenchymal stem cells (CD10, CD90, CD105, CD166) during monolayer culture suggested that dedifferentiation leads to reversion to a primitive phenotype. This study contributes to the definition of HAC phenotype, and provides new potential markers to characterize chondrocyte differentiation stage in the context of tissue engineering applications.
2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.15388786
Effects of prostaglandin D(2) and 5-lipoxygenase products on the expression of CD203c and CD11b by basophils.
Monneret Guillaume, Boumiza Radhia, Gravel Sylvie, Cossette Chantal, Bienvenu Jacques, Rokach Joshua, Powell William S
The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics
Basophils are important in allergic diseases such as asthma because they produce a variety of inflammatory mediators. Activation of these cells with IgE and N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine results in a variety of responses, including increased surface expression of CD203c and CD11b and release of histamine. Although considerable information is available on the effects of eicosanoids on neutrophils, eosinophils, and monocytes, less is known about their effects on basophils. In the present study, we examined the effects of various eicosanoids on the above basophil responses. Of the naturally occurring eicosanoids tested, prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2); EC(50), 10 nM) was by far the most potent activator of CD203c expression, with other prostanoids having little effect. This response was mediated by the DP(2) receptor/chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 cells because it was shared by the selective agonist 15R-methyl-PGD(2) (EC(50), 3 nM). The 5-lipoxygenase products leuko-triene B(4) and 5-oxo-6,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid also stimulated CD203c expression but to a lesser extent than PGD(2), whereas leukotriene D(4) was inactive. Neither PGD(2) nor 5-oxo-6,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid stimulated histamine release or CD63 expression on basophils. Both PGE(2) and the DP(1) receptor agonist BW245C [(4S)-(3-[(3R,S)-3-cyclohexyl-3-hydroxypropyl]-2,5-dioxo)-4-imidazolidineheptanoic acid] strongly inhibited DP(2) receptor-mediated CD203c expression. The DP(1) receptor antagonist BWA868C [3-[(2-cyclohexyl-2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-2,5-dioxo-1-(phenylmethyl)-4-imidazolidine-heptanoic acid] enhanced PGD(2)-induced CD203c expression, suggesting that interaction of PGD(2) with DP(1) receptors can limit activation of basophils by this prostaglandin. In conclusion, PGD(2) is the most potent inducer of basophil CD203c expression among eicosanoids and may be a key mediator in asthma and other allergic diseases. The balance between DP(1) and DP(2) receptors may be important in determining the magnitude of basophil responses to this prostaglandin.15384980
Multiple platelet defects identified by flow cytometry at diagnosis in acute myeloid leukaemia.
Leinoe E B, Hoffmann M H, Kjaersgaard E, Johnsen H E
British journal of haematology
Summary Previous findings of megakaryocytic hypogranulation and dysmegakaryocytopoietic features in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) strongly indicate defects in platelet production. The bleeding tendency of these patients may result from dysregulated platelet production, resulting in thrombocytopenia as well as qualitative platelet defects. The present study examined platelet function at diagnosis in 50 AML patients by whole blood flow cytometry. Following in vitro platelet agonist stimulation, platelet activation markers were analysed and compared with 20 healthy individuals. To detect recent in vivo platelet activation, plasma soluble P-selectin (sP-selectin) was measured. Flow cytometric analysis of platelet activation markers demonstrated reduced CD62P [35.6 vs. 118.5 x 10(3) molecules of equivalent soluble fluorochrome (MESF); P < 0.0001], CD63 (11.3 vs. 50.7 x 10(3) MESF; P < 0.0001), and PAC-1 (41.5 vs. 90.5%; P = 0.0001) while reductions in CD42b were abnormal (45.6 vs. 70%; P < 0.0001). sP-selectin levels were similar in patients and healthy controls (0.04 vs. 0.27 fg/platelet; P = 0.84). The presented data indicate that AML pathogenesis may result in multiple platelet defects, involving adhesion, aggregation, and secretion and demonstrate that flow cytometry is a feasible method for platelet function analysis in patients with thrombocytopenia.
Copyright 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd15381054
Magnitude and time course of platelet inhibition with Aggrenox and Aspirin in patients after ischemic stroke: the AGgrenox versus Aspirin Therapy Evaluation (AGATE) trial.
Serebruany Victor L, Malinin Alex I, Sane David C, Jilma Bernd, Takserman Aviv, Atar Dan, Hennekens Charles H
European journal of pharmacology
The European Stroke Prevention Study showed greater stroke prevention for Aggrenox than either for aspirin or dipyridamole alone. To test whether Aggrenox has superior antiplatelet properties to aspirin alone we conducted the AGgrenox versus Aspirin Therapy Evaluation (AGATE) trial. Forty patients with prior ischemic stroke not taking aspirin for at least 30 days were randomized to Aggrenox (2 pills/daily) or aspirin (81 mg plus matching placebo/daily) for 30 days. Platelet function was assessed at baseline, 24 h, and days 3, 7, 15, and 30 by aggregometry, flow cytometry and cartridge-based analyzers. Both Aggrenox and aspirin provided fast and sustained platelet inhibition. Aggrenox(R), however, especially after 15 days, showed significant prolongation of the closure time (P=0.04), diminished expression of platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) (P=0.01), glycoprotein IIb (GPIIb) antigen (P=0.02), and GPIIb/IIIa activity (P=0.01) by PAC-1 C antibody, CD63 (P=0.03), as well as inhibition of Protease Activated Receptors (PAR-1) associated with intact (SPAN12, P=0.01) and cleaved (WEDE15, P=0.01) thrombin receptors as compared with aspirin. Surprisingly, GPIb expression increased, especially after aspirin. In the randomized trial of small sample size, aspirin and Aggrenox produced fast and sustained platelet inhibition. In 25 of 90 direct comparisons, Aggrenox was superior to aspirin, whereas in 4 of 90, aspirin was superior to Aggrenox. In 61 of 90 direct comparisons, aspirin and Aggrenox were equivalent. Aggrenox was associated with a profound reduction of PAR-1 receptors, an observation that may be related to the greater clinical benefit of Aggrenox compared with Aspirin in preventing recurrent stroke.15375577
CD82, and CD63 in thyroid cancer.
Chen Zhouxun, Mustafa Tarek, Trojanowicz Bogusz, Brauckhoff Michael, Gimm Oliver, Schmutzler Cornelia, Köhrle Josef, Holzhausen Hans-Jürgen, Kehlen Astrid, Klonisch Thomas, Finke Rainer, Dralle Henning, Hoang-Vu Cuong
International journal of molecular medicine
CD82 (KAI1) and CD63 (ME491) are highly glycosylated proteins which belong to the transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF). CD82 has been implicated as a possible prostate cancer metastasis suppressor gene, whereas CD63 is involved in the progression of human melanoma cancer. Down-regulation of both CD82 and CD63 expression has been associated with the metastatic potential of several solid tumors. Currently, information is lacking on the role of CD82 and CD63 during thyroid carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to determine whether the expression of CD82 and CD63 is a useful prognostic indicator in patients with thyroid carcinoma. The expression of CD82 and CD63 was analysed by reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry in benign goiter (n=12) and 75 primary thyroid carcinoma tissue specimens (PTC: 33, FTC: 24, UTC: 18) out of which 36 were non-metastasized primary tumors and 39 were metastasized tumors (regional lymph node and/or distant metastases). All of the benign goiter tissues showed CD82 expression. By contrast, a significant decrease in CD82 mRNA and protein levels was detected in carcinoma tissues as compared to benign goiter tissues (p<0.001). A similar down-regulation was observed in metastasized tumor tissues when compared with non-metastasized tumors (all p<0.05). CD82 expression was correlated with pTNM status of differentiated and undifferentiated thyroid tumor and the pathologic stage of differentiated thyroid tumor. In contrast to CD82, CD63 mRNA and protein expression was unchanged in all thyroid carcinomas. Benign goiter tissues showed weak expression of CD63. There were no significant correlation between CD63 mRNA/protein expression and any clinical/pathological parameters. Our results support the hypothesis that down-regulation of CD82 expression may reflect an increased in vivo metastatic potential of thyroid cancer cells. CD82 may serve as a prognostic marker of metastasis in thyroid cancer. Constitutive expression of CD63 may indicate that this factor does not play a direct role in thyroid carcinogenesis.15355471
The CD63 basophil activation test in Hymenoptera venom allergy: a prospective study.
Sturm G J, Böhm E, Trummer M, Weiglhofer I, Heinemann A, Aberer W
Allergy
The basophil activation test (BAT), which relies on flow cytometric quantitation of the allergen-induced up-regulation of the granule-associated marker CD63 in peripheral blood basophils, has been suggested to be a useful approach in detecting responsiveness to allergens. The purpose of this study was to establish the usefulness of the BAT with regard to the clinical history and current diagnostic tools in Hymenoptera venom allergy using a prospective study design.
Fifty-seven consecutive patients allergic to Hymenoptera venom as defined by a systemic reaction after an insect sting, and 30 age- and sex-matched control subjects with a negative history were included. The degree and nature of sensitization was confirmed by skin testing, specific immunoglobulin E (IgE), serum tryptase levels and BAT. In the nonallergic control group only analysis of specific IgE and BAT were performed. Correlation of BAT, skin test and specific IgE, respectively, with the clinical history in the allergic group was termed as sensitivity and in the control group as specificity.
Twenty one of 23 (91.3%) bee venom allergic patients and 29 of 34 (85.3%) patients allergic to wasp and hornet venom tested positive in BAT. The overall sensitivity of BAT, specific IgE and skin tests were 87.7, 91.2 and 93.0%, respectively. The overall specificities were 86.7% for BAT and 66.7% for specific IgE. No correlation between the severity of clinical symptoms and the magnitude of basophil activation was observed.
The BAT seems to be an appropriate method to identify patients allergic to bee or wasp venom with a comparable sensitivity to standard diagnostic regimens. The higher specificity of BAT as compared with specific IgE makes this test a useful tool in the diagnosis of Hymenoptera venom allergy.15355470
The basophil activation test in wasp venom allergy: sensitivity, specificity and monitoring specific immunotherapy.
Erdmann S M, Sachs B, Kwiecien R, Moll-Slodowy S, Sauer I, Merk H F
Allergy
As in vitro diagnosis of wasp venom sensitization by specific serum IgE has a sensitivity of only 60-80%, additional in vitro tests are desirable. Basophil activation is associated with the expression of CD63 and its measurement has been proposed as a novel in vitro test for immediate-type allergy. Furthermore, to date, no in vitro test exists to monitor successful specific immunotherapy (SIT) with wasp venom. Therefore, the potentially harmful sting challenge is still recommended.
We compared the CD63-based basophil activation test (BAT) in the diagnosis of wasp venom allergy with skin tests and measurement of specific IgE. Furthermore, we investigated whether BAT can predict the outcome of the sting challenge in patients on SIT.
Fifty patients with a systemic reaction caused by a wasp sting and 20 controls were studied. Intracutaneous tests were performed with wasp and bee venom in the suspected allergics. Specific IgE was determined by the CAP-FEIA method and basophil activation by flow cytometry upon double staining with anti-IgE/anti-CD63 mAb. Twenty-five patients were sting challenged 6 months after starting SIT and the BAT was repeated before challenge.
Sensitivity of the intracutaneous tests, specific IgE and BAT was 100, 76, and 92%, respectively. Specificity of specific IgE and the BAT was 85 and 80%, respectively. The cut-off for a positive BAT was 15% CD63+ basophils. There was a positive correlation between IgE reactivity to wasp venom and the number of CD63+ basophils (r = 0.65). Although no patient had a systemic reaction upon sting challenge, in most subjects basophil activation did not decrease when compared with the BAT before SIT.
Quantitation of basophil activation by CD63 expression is a valuable new in vitro method for diagnosis of allergy to hymenopteran venoms. The CD63-based BAT is a helpful tool for the complementation of routine diagnostic tests such as specific IgE as it increases sensitivity of in vitro detection of sensitization. However, this in vitro method does not offer an alternative to the sting challenge in monitoring successful SIT.15351990
LAMP-1 and LAMP-2, but not LAMP-3, are reliable markers for activation-induced secretion of human mast cells.
Grützkau Andreas, Smorodchenko Alina, Lippert Undine, Kirchhof Loreen, Artuc Metin, Henz Beate M
Cytometry. Part A : the journal of the International Society for Analytical Cytology
Mast cells are resident tissue cells that induce anaphylactic reactions by rapidly releasing mediators after antigen-mediated cross-linking of immunoglobulin E receptors. In the similarly active peripheral blood basophilic leukocyte, lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP-3; CD63) has been described as an activation marker, but LAMPs have not been investigated in normal tissue mast cells.
Intra- and extracellular expressions of LAMP-1 (CD107a), LAMP-2 (CD107b), and LAMP-3 (CD63) were analysed by flow cytometry, immunocytochemistry, and functional assays in unstimulated and stimulated leukemic human mast cell line 1 (HMC-1) and skin mast cells.
On flow cytometry, all mast cells expressed LAMP-3 at their cell membranes, whereas LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 were barely detectable (HMC-1 cells) or expressed at low levels (<10% of skin mast cells). After fixation and permeabilisation, high intracellular levels of all three LAMPs were noted in both cell types. After stimulation, a rapid translocation of intracellular LAMPs to the cell membrane, with an associated release of histamine, leukotriene C(4) and prostaglandin D(2), was ascertained in skin mast cells only.
These results show that LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 are activation markers for normal mast cells. The lack of LAMP translocation after activation of leukemic mast cells may be related to maturation or malignancy-associated defects of these cells.
Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc15347386
Regarding Ebo DG, Hagendorens MM, Bridts CH, Schuerwegh AJ, De Clerck LS & Stevens WJ. In vitro allergy diagnosis: should we follow the flow? Clin Exp Allergy 2004; 34:332-9.
Erdmann S M, Sachs B, Hoffmann-Sommergruber K, Scheiner O, Merk H
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
15347380
The flow-cytometric determination of basophil activation induced by aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is useful for in vitro diagnosis of the NSAID hypersensitivity syndrome.
Gamboa P, Sanz M L, Caballero M R, Urrutia I, Antépara I, Esparza R, de Weck A L
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Hypersensitivity reactions to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), manifested by cutaneous symptoms and/or airway manifestations represent 20-25% of all hypersensitivity reactions to drugs. Today, it is still claimed that no in vitro diagnostic tests exist for that condition and that the only way to confirm the diagnosis is a provocation challenge.
The objective of this study was to assess whether NSAIDs may provoke blood basophil activation in vitro in such patients, as detected by a flowcytometric technique.
Sixty NSAID hypersensitive patients (38 with cutaneous, 20 with airway and two with cutaneous and airway symptoms) and 30 control patients (15 asthmatics) were selected. Their hypersensitivity was confirmed by documented history indicating at least two clinical episodes to two or more different NSAIDs or by positive oral provocation challenge. Isolated buffy coat leukocytes were stimulated in vitro with aspirin, paracetamol, metamizol, diclofenac, and naproxen. The percentage of activated basophils was evaluated by an anti-CD63.
Aspirin showed a sensitivity of 43.3%, a specificity of 100%, a positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 99.4%. For the other NSAIDs, the sensitivity and specificity values were: for paracetamol 11.7% and 100%, for metamizol 15% and 100%, for diclofenac 43.3% and 93.3% and for naproxen 54.8% and 74.1%. When considering the first four NSAIDs, the global sensitivity raised to 63.3% and specificity to 93.3%. If the number of tests is to be limited for practical reasons, the combination of acetylsalicylic acid and diclofenac at two concentrations yields a sensitivity of 58.3% and a specificity of 93.3%.
Flowcytometric determinations of basophil activation following stimulation with NSAIDs show a high sensitivity (60-70%) with specificity above 90%. So this test may help avoiding some cumbersome and dangerous provocation challenges.15345724
Stabilin-1 localizes to endosomes and the trans-Golgi network in human macrophages and interacts with GGA adaptors.
Kzhyshkowska Julia, Gratchev Alexei, Martens Jan-Henning, Pervushina Olga, Mamidi Srinivas, Johansson Sophie, Schledzewski Kai, Hansen Berit, He Xiangyuan, Tang Jordan, Nakayama Kazuhisa, Goerdt Sergij
Journal of leukocyte biology
Stabilin-1 and stabilin-2 constitute a novel family of fasciclin domain-containing hyaluronan receptor homologues recently described by us. Whereas stabilin-1 is expressed in sinusoidal endothelial cells and in macrophages in vivo, stabilin-2 is absent from the latter. In the present study, we analyzed the subcellular distribution of stabilin-1 in primary human macrophages. Using flow cytometry, expression of stabilin-1 was demonstrated on the surface of interleukin-4/dexamethasone-stimulated macrophages (MPhi2). By immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy, we established that stabilin-1 is preferentially localized in early endosome antigen-1-positive early/sorting endosomes and in recycling endosomes identified by transferrin endocytosis. Association of stabilin-1 was infrequently seen with p62 lck ligand-positive late endosomes and with CD63-positive lysosomes but not in lysosome-associated membrane protein-1-positive lysosomes. Stabilin-1 was also found in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) but not in Golgi stack structures. Glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay revealed that the cytoplasmic tail of stabilin-1 but not stabilin-2 binds to recently discovered Golgi-localized, gamma-ear-containing, adenosine 5'-diphosphate-ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) adaptors GGA1, GGA2, and GGA3 long, mediating traffic between Golgi and endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Stabilin-1 did not bind to GGA3 short, which lacks a part of the Vps27p/Hrs/STAM domain. Deletion of DDSLL and LL amino acid motifs resulted in decreased binding of stabilin-1 with GGAs. A small portion of stabilin-1 colocalized with GGA2 and GGA3 in the TGN in MPhi2. Treatment with brefeldin A resulted in accumulation of stabilin-1 in the TGN. Our results suggest that stabilin-1 is involved in the GGA-mediated sorting processes at the interface of the biosynthetic and endosomal pathways; similarly to other GGA-interacting proteins, stabilin-1 may thus function in endocytic and secretory processes of human macrophages.15327546
Basophil CD63 expression assay on highly sensitized atopic donor leucocytes-a useful method in chronic autoimmune urticaria.
Gyimesi E, Sipka S, Dankó K, Kiss E, Hídvégi B, Gál M, Hunyadi J, Irinyi B, Szegedi A
The British journal of dermatology
The autoimmune subclass of chronic idiopathic urticaria (CU) has been characterized by the occurrence of biologically relevant IgG antibodies against the IgE molecule or the alpha chain of the high-affinity Fcepsilon receptor (FcepsilonRIalpha) on basophils and mast cells. These antibodies are usually detected by autologous serum skin testing and confirmed by histamine release studies, immunoblotting, or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, but not always.
To detect autoantibodies to the FcepsilonRIalpha in sera of CU patients by a modified serum-induced basophil activation test measured by flow cytometry (FCM) and to evaluate the relationship between the in vitro functional test, the autologous serum skin test (ASST), and the serum levels of IgE, eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) and antithyroid antibodies.
Sera of 30 patients with CU and 26 patients with systemic autoimmune diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis) were tested for CD63 activation marker expression on basophils by FCM. Leucocytes from two highly sensitized atopic donors (D(A1,) D(A2)) and one non-atopic donor (D(NA)) were incubated with patients' sera and double-labelled with anti-IgE and anti-CD63 antibodies. Subsequently, the percentage of CD63-expressing basophils was determined by using FCM. In all CU patients an ASST was carried out and the serum IgE, and ECP levels and antithyroid antibodies were evaluated.
Twelve patients had a positive ASST and 14 patients a positive CD63 expression assay. There was a strong correlation between the ASST and CD63 assay. Sera from patients with systemic autoimmune diseases did not raise positive CD63 expression on basophils. There was a moderate negative correlation between the occurrence of atopic serum markers (IgE, ECP) and the ability of sera to induce CD63 expression on basophil cells of D(A2) (P < 0.05). The female sex was preponderant and antithyroid antibodies were more frequent.
Our new technical observation demonstrates that basophils of highly sensitized atopic donors can be successfully used without priming with IL-3 for the in-vitro flow cytofluorimetric diagnosis of CU. With this investigation the characterization of the autoimmune origin of CU is based on an objective in vitro technique.15316492
In vitro assays for the diagnosis of IgE-mediated disorders.
Hamilton Robert G, Franklin Adkinson N
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Advances in technology have provided new laboratory tools for the quantitation of allergen-specific IgE antibodies in serum and on the surface of basophils. This review examines the evolution from qualitative IgE antibody assays of the late 1960s to the present-day, third-generation, automated and quantitative allergen-specific IgE assays. The latest technology trend is toward microarrays in which crude or purified native and recombinant allergens can be spotted in microdot arrays on silica chips to permit extensive panels of specific IgE measurements to be performed with small quantities of serum. Although these technologies hold promise, their diagnostic performance requires further assessment once their technical details have been optimized. Potential abuses of this newer IgE antibody technology include the use of allergosorbent specificities (eg, especially food and drugs) that lack validation, application of IgE antibody measurements in the diagnosis of non-IgE-dependent disorders (eg, aspirin sensitivity), and modification of IgE antibody assays to measure food-specific IgG antibody for which there is no clinical indication. Basophil mediator release assays have evolved to include flow cytometric methods that can quantitatively detect the presence of cell surface-bound allergen-specific IgE antibodies. Assays for histamine and leukotriene C 4 released after in vitro basophil activation are now more accurate and standardized. Current analytic methods for IgE antibodies provide more quantitative and reproducible measurements of IgE than ever before, although still with less sensitivity that traditional skin testing. The current challenge is to translate the quantitative IgE antibody results into a more accurate diagnosis of allergic disease.15304003
Expression of tetraspanins in peripheral blood leukocytes: a comparison between normal and infectious conditions.
Tohami T, Drucker L, Radnay J, Shapira H, Lishner M
Tissue antigens
The role of tetraspanins is undefined, despite their detection in diverse cell types and functions. This study addresses the characterization of tetraspanin expression levels in normal peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) and in patients with bacterial infection. Membranal and cytoplasmic expression of CD9, CD53, CD63, CD81, CD82 and CD151 in polymorphonuclears (PMN), monocytes, B and T lymphocytes was assessed using flow cytometry. Results suggested that for normal PBL, PMN are distinguished by dominant cytoplasmic CD63; monocytes and B cells prevailingly express CD53; CD82 is primarily expressed on T-cell membranes. However, a major trend of downregulation was demonstrated for the examined tetraspanins, except CD63, in all patients' PBL subtypes. Therefore, tetraspanin modulation in infections may be attributed to elevated leukocyte motility in immune reactions and this is compatible with the previous publications of tetraspanins as metastasis suppressors. This work represents the first comprehensive baseline of tetraspanin expression in normal PBL and in infectious disorders.15251408
A novel flow cytometric assay focusing on perforin release mechanisms of cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Weren Andrea, Bonnekoh Bernd, Schraven Burkhart, Gollnick Harald, Ambach Andreas
Journal of immunological methods
CD8(hi+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) are major players in immune defense. In addition, they contribute to the maintenance of immune homeostasis. We now describe a hitherto unavailable, but simple assay to determine ex vivo lytic granule-based cytotoxic functions of human CD8(hi+) CTL subgroups in a clinical setting, under target cell free conditions. Ficoll-isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes from 17 healthy volunteers were stimulated either by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) in combination with ionomycin or by antibody mediated crosslinking of the CD3 molecule on the T cell surface. Using perforin as a marker for lytic granules, the reduction of CTL granules over time intervals up to 120 min was quantified by FACScan flow cytometry. The kinetics of perforin reduction were compared to the kinetics of NA-CBZ-L-lysine-thiobenzyl ester hydrochloride (BLT)-esterase release and of CD63 upregulation. The reduction in the perforin(+) portion of CD8(hi+) CTLs was correlated inversely with BLT-esterase release and CD63 upregulation. At 30 and 120 min after PMA/ionomycin stimulation, 55 +/- 14% and 42 +/- 14%, respectively, of CD8(hi+) CTLs still stained perforin(+) (time point 0 min = 100%). Perforin-granule release induced by CD3-crosslinking occurred as fast within 30 min (55 +/- 17%), but over the 120 min time interval it was not as complete when compared to PMA/ionomycin-stimulated perforin-reduction. Thus, the combination of an established degranulation assay with the power of immuno flow cytometry allows one to investigate the cytotoxic capability of CTL-subtypes and the kinetics of perforin-granule release. In addition, the assay may prove useful in the elucidation of intracellular signaling cascades governing the perforin-granule release process.15238796
Diagnostic methods for insect sting allergy.
Hamilton Robert G
Current opinion in allergy and clinical immunology
This review overviews advances from mid-2002 to the present in the validation and performance methods used in the diagnosis of Hymenoptera venom-induced immediate-type hypersensitivity.
The general diagnostic algorithm for insect sting allergy is initially discussed with an examination of the AAAAI's 2003 revised practice parameter guidelines. Changes as a result of a greater recognition of skin test negative systemic reactors include repeat analysis of all testing and acceptance of serology as a complementary diagnostic test to the skin test. Original data examining concordance of venom-specific IgE results produced by the second-generation Pharmacia CAP System with the Johns Hopkins University radioallergosorbent test are presented. Diagnostic performance of honeybee venom-specific IgE assays used in clinical laboratories in North America is discussed using data from the Diagnostic Allergy Proficiency Survey conducted by the College of American Pathologists. Validity of venom-specific IgE antibody in postmortem blood specimens is demonstrated. The utility of alternative in-vivo (provocation) and in-vitro (basophil-based) diagnostic testing methods is critiqued.
This overview supports the following conclusions. Improved practice parameter guidelines include serology and skin test as complementary in supporting a positive clinical history during the diagnostic process. Data are provided which support the analytical performance of commercially available venom-specific IgE antibody serology-based assays. Intentional sting challenge in-vivo provocation, in-vitro basophil flow cytometry (CD63, CD203c) based assays, and in-vitro basophil histamine and sulfidoleukotriene release assays have their utility in the study of difficult diagnostic cases, but their use will remain as supplementary, secondary diagnostic tests.15226397
Farnesyltransferase inhibitors disrupt EGF receptor traffic through modulation of the RhoB GTPase.
Wherlock Matthew, Gampel Alexandra, Futter Clare, Mellor Harry
Journal of cell science
The Rho family of small GTPases play a pivotal role in the dynamic regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Recent studies have suggested that these signalling proteins also have wide-ranging functions in membrane trafficking pathways. The Rho family member RhoB was shown to localise to vesicles of the endocytic compartment, suggesting a potential function in regulation of endocytic traffic. In keeping with this, we have previously shown that expression of active RhoB causes a delay in the intracellular trafficking of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor; however, the site of action of RhoB within the endocytic pathway is still unknown. RhoB exists as two prenylated forms in cells: geranylgeranylated RhoB (RhoB-GG) and farnesylated RhoB (RhoB-F). Here we use farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) to show that prenylation specifies the cellular localisation of RhoB. RhoB-GG localises to multivesicular late endosomes and farnesylated RhoB (RhoB-F) localises to the plasma membrane. The gain of endosomal RhoB-GG elicited by FTI treatment reduces sorting of EGF receptor to the lysosome and increases recycling to the plasma membrane. Ultrastructural analysis shows that activation of RhoB through drug treatment or mutation has no effect the sorting of receptor into late endosomes, but instead inhibits the subsequent transfer of late endosomal receptor to the lysosome.15203718
Platelet activation markers, microparticles and soluble adhesion molecules are elevated in patients with arteriosclerosis obliterans: therapeutic effects by cilostazol and potentiation by dipyridamole.
Nomura Shosaku, Inami Norihito, Iwasaka Toshiji, Liu Yongge
Platelets
We evaluated the plasma concentrations of platelet activation markers, microparticles and soluble adhesion molecules in patients with arteriosclerosis obliterans (ASO) and compared the beneficial effects of cilostazol alone and combination therapy of cilostazol and dipyridamole in these patients. There was a significant elevation of CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, annexin V, platelet-derived microparticles (PDMPs), sP-selectin, sE-selectin, sICAM-1 and sVCAM-1 in the ASO patients compared with the controls. Platelet aggregation was decreased by 2 weeks of cilostazol monotherapy in the ASO patients. Adding dipyridamole to the cilostazol therapy for 2 weeks further reduced platelet aggregation. While treatment with cilostazol alone reduced levels of CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, annexin V, PDMP, and sP-selectin, the combination therapy reduced these parameters further. While sE-selectin and cell adhesion molecules did not change significantly after 2 weeks of combination therapy, they exhibited a remarkable decrease after 16 weeks of combination treatment. These findings suggest that platelets are activated in ASO patients, and cilostazol is effective to reduce platelet activation. Furthermore, dipyridamole may potentiate the beneficial effect of cilostazol in ASO patients. Combination use of both drugs may help to prevent the onset of cardiovascular complications in patients with ASO by activated platelets and PDMP.15203716
The platelet function defect of paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria.
Grünewald Martin, Grünewald Anja, Schmid Anke, Schöpflin Christine, Schauer Stefanie, Griesshammer Martin, Koksch Mario
Platelets
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare, acquired stem cell disorder, characterised by an abnormal susceptibility of red blood cells to complement induced lysis, resulting in repeated episodes of intravascular haemolysis and haemoglobinuria, thromboembolic events at atypical locations and, to a much lesser extent, bleeding complications. Platelet function is assumed to be abnormal, however, a defect has not yet been characterised and underlying mechanisms remain elusive. To explore these issues, we investigated platelet function in PNH patients using assays for clot formation under low and high shear force (thrombelastography and PFA100 device), adhesion to glass beads in native whole blood (Hellem method), aggregometry using various agonists (Born method), and flow cytometric assays for baseline and agonist-induced surface expression density of alpha-granule (CD62P) and lysosomal granule proteins (CD63), ligand binding to surface receptors (thrombospondin), and expression density of activation-induced neoepitopes of the fibrinogen receptor complex (PAC-1). Platelet PNH clone size determined by CD55 and CD59 labelling was compared to the clone sizes of granulocytes, monocytes, erythrocytes, and reticulocytes. A profound reduction of platelet reactivity was observed in PNH patients for all "global function" assays (clot formation, adhesion, aggregation). Platelet hyporeactivity was confirmed using flow cytometric assays. Whereas baseline levels of flow cytometrically determined platelet activation markers did not differ significantly between controls and PNH patients, agonist-induced values of all markers were distinctly reduced in the PNH group. Moreover, significantly reduced white blood cell counts (3.1/nl vs. 5.9/nl), haemoglobin values (9.5 vs. 14.3/g per dl), and platelet counts (136 vs. 219/nl) delineate profound tricytopenia in PNH patients. The fraction of particular cell types lacking the surface expression of GPI-anchored glycoproteins is referred to as the respective PNH clone; median PNH clone sizes of cells with short life spans (reticulocytes, platelets, granulocytes) was 50-80% of total cell populations compared to 20% of red blood cells. The results of our laboratory investigations show, that in PNH, reduced platelet counts coincide with reduced platelet reactivity. The foremost clinical complication in PNH, however, is venous thromboembolism, very probably induced by an activated and dysregulated plasmatic coagulation system. From these seemingly contradictory findings we infer, that part of the platelet hyporeactivity is probably due to reactive downregulation of platelet function in response to chronic hyperstimulation. The overall result is thought to be an unsteady balance, associated with thromboembolism in a larger proportion of patients, and with bleeding in a smaller proportion.15202015
Identification of differentially expressed genes in clinically distinct groups of serous ovarian carcinomas using cDNA microarray.
Collins Yvonne, Tan Dong Feng, Pejovic Tanja, Mor Gil, Qian Feng, Rutherford Thomas, Varma Ram, McQuaid Devin, Driscoll Deborah, Jiang Ming, Deeb George, Lele Shashikant, Nowak Norma, Odunsi Kunle
International journal of molecular medicine
To identify changes in gene expression in serous epithelial ovarian cancers (SEOC), we utilized cDNA microarrays consisting of 2382 genes with cancer related properties to analyze tumors from 20 patients with defined clinical out-comes. The significance analysis of microarrays method was used to determine differentially expressed genes, leading to the identification of 134 up-regulated and 231 down-regulated genes overall. By increasing the stringency of the statistical selection criteria, 41 over-expressed and 51 under-expressed genes were identified. The median duration of follow-up of the 20 patients was 16.8 months with a median progression free survival of 7.0 months. We found 11 genes that were differentially over-expressed in patients with recurrent disease, and 3 genes (homo sapiens mRNA for Ins P3 5-phophatase, lipoma HMGIC fusion partner-like 2 and CD63 melanoma 1 antigen) in patients who were dead of disease. Subsequently, we examined the distribution of the differentially expressed genes in the cDNA library database from adult human tumor and normal tissues using the DigiNorthern method to identify a subset of genes with relatively restricted tissue distribution. Finally, protein expression of 5 selected genes were further examined using immunohistochemistry applied on a tissue microarray prepared from an independent panel of 93 SEOC tissues. The results provided validation for 2 under-expressed genes (E2F transcription factor 5 and CK14) and 3 over-expressed genes (Bcl2-like 1, COX-2, CD63). Our study demonstrates differential gene expression in clinically distinct groups of SEOC using cDNA microarray. These genes may potentially be useful as biomarkers and/or targets for therapeutic intervention.15181373
Translation-state analysis of gene expression in mouse brain after focal ischemia.
MacManus John P, Graber Tyson, Luebbert Christian, Preston Edward, Rasquinha Ingrid, Smith Brandon, Webster Jacqueline
Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism
Confounding any genome-scale analysis of gene expression after cerebral ischemia is massive suppression of protein synthesis. This inefficient translation questions the utility of examining profiles of total transcripts. Our approach to such postischemic gene profiling in the mouse by microarray analysis was to concentrate on those mRNAs bound to polyribosomes. In our proof-of-principle study, polysomally bound and unbound mRNAs were subjected to microarray analysis: of the 1,161 transcripts that we found to increase after ischemia, only 36% were bound to polyribosomes. In addition to the expected increases in heat-shock proteins and metallothioneins, increases in several other bound transcripts involved in the promotion of cell survival or antiinflammatory behavior were noted, such as CD63 (Lamp3), Lcn2 (lipocalin-2), Msn (moesin), and UCP2 (uncoupling protein 2), all of which showed increases in cognate protein by Western blotting. The list of heretofore nonfunctionally annotated transcripts (RIKEN clones/ESTs) that increased appeared to be novel. How some transcripts are selected in ischemic brain for translation into protein, while others are rejected, is not clear. The length of the 5'-UTR in the ischemically induced transcripts that occur in the NCBI RefSeq database did not indicate any general tendency to be more than 200 nt, nor to be longer than the 5'-UTRs of the unbound transcripts. Thus, the presence of a complex 5'-UTR region with internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) or polypyrimidine tracts (TOP) does not appear to be the basis of selection for translation in ischemic brain.15180868
Platelet degranulation and monocyte-platelet complex formation are increased in the acute and convalescent phases after ischaemic stroke or transient ischaemic attack.
McCabe Dominick J H, Harrison Paul, Mackie Ian J, Sidhu Paul S, Purdy Gordon, Lawrie Andrew S, Watt Hilary, Brown Martin M, Machin Samuel J
British journal of haematology
Flow cytometric studies suggest that platelets are activated in ischaemic stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA). However, few studies have measured circulating leucocyte-platelet complexes in this patient population. Whole blood flow cytometry was used to quantify the expression of CD62P-, CD63-, and PAC1-binding, and the percentages of leucocyte-platelet complexes in acute (1-27 d, n = 79) and convalescent (79-725 d, n = 70) ischaemic cerebrovascular disease (CVD) patients compared with controls without CVD (n = 27). We performed a full blood count, and measured plasma levels of soluble P-selectin, soluble E-selectin, and von Willebrand factor antigen (VWF:Ag) as additional markers of platelet and/or endothelial cell activation. The median percentage CD62P expression and the median percentage monocyte-platelet complexes were higher in both acute and convalescent CVD patients than controls (P </= 0.02). The mean white cell count and mean VWF:Ag levels were significantly elevated in the acute and convalescent phases after ischaemic stroke or TIA (P </= 0.02). Otherwise, there was no significant increase in any other marker of platelet or endothelial activation in CVD patients. There was a positive correlation between the percentage expression of CD62P and the percentages of both neutrophil-platelet and monocyte-platelet complexes in the acute phase, and the percentages of all leucocyte-platelet complexes in the convalescent phase after ischaemic CVD. This study provides evidence for ongoing excessive platelet and/or endothelial activation in ischaemic CVD patients despite treatment with antithrombotic therapy.15173316
Marrow-isolated adult multilineage inducible (MIAMI) cells, a unique population of postnatal young and old human cells with extensive expansion and differentiation potential.
D'Ippolito Gianluca, Diabira Sylma, Howard Guy A, Menei Philippe, Roos Bernard A, Schiller Paul C
Journal of cell science
We report here the isolation of a population of non-transformed pluripotent human cells from bone marrow after a unique expansion/selection procedure. This procedure was designed to provide conditions resembling the in vivo microenvironment that is home for the most-primitive stem cells. Marrow-adherent and -nonadherent cells were co-cultured on fibronectin, at low oxygen tension, for 14 days. Colonies of small adherent cells were isolated and further expanded on fibronectin at low density, low oxygen tension with 2% fetal bovine serum. They expressed high levels of CD29, CD63, CD81, CD122, CD164, hepatocyte growth factor receptor (cMet), bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1B (BMPR1B), and neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 3 (NTRK3) and were negative for CD34, CD36, CD45, CD117 (cKit) and HLADR. The embryonic stem cell markers Oct-4 and Rex-1, and telomerase were expressed in all cultures examined. Cell-doubling time was 36 to 72 hours, and cells have been expanded in culture for more than 50 population doublings. This population of cells was consistently isolated from men and women of ages ranging from 3- to 72-years old. Colonies of cells expressed numerous markers found among embryonic stem cells as well as mesodermal-, endodermal- and ectodermal-derived lineages. They have been differentiated to bone-forming osteoblasts, cartilage-forming chondrocytes, fat-forming adipocytes and neural cells and to attachment-independent spherical clusters expressing genes associated with pancreatic islets. Based on their unique characteristics and properties, we refer to them as human marrow-isolated adult multilineage inducible cells, or MIAMI cells. MIAMI cells proliferate extensively without evidence of senescence or loss of differentiation potential and thus may represent an ideal candidate for cellular therapies of inherited or degenerative diseases.15168594
Markers of endothelial and in vivo platelet activation in patients with essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera.
Karakantza Marina, Giannakoulas Nikolaos C, Zikos Panagiotis, Sakellaropoulos George, Kouraklis Alexandra, Aktypi Anthi, Metallinos Ioannis C, Theodori Eleni, Zoumbos Nicholas C, Maniatis Alice
International journal of hematology
We investigated endothelial and in vivo platelet activation in a cohort of 52 patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) and polycythemia vera (PV) before and after cytoreductive treatment, 22 healthy controls, and 17 patients with acute cerebrovascular ischemia (ACVI) and normal platelet counts. We measured platelet expression of CD62P and CD63 antigens and levels of soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (sVCAM-1). We found increased in vivo platelet activation in all patients with ET and PV, both before and after cytoreductive treatment, compared with controls. In patients with arterial thrombosis, platelet expression of CD62P, and in patients with erythromelalgia, expression of both markers was higher compared with expression in patients without thrombotic complications. In patients with ET and PV before and after treatment, sVCAM-1 expression was increased compared with expression in controls but also compared with expression in patients with ACVI and normal platelet counts. In patients with arterial thrombosis and erythromelalgia, in vivo platelet activation correlated with the level of sVCAM-1. Our findings indicated that in vivo platelet activation reflects intrinsic platelet defects in patients with ET and PV, persists after cytoreductive treatment, and results in endothelial damage, probably through release of angiogenic factors and/or activation of white blood cells.15163665
Impaired platelet activation in familial high density lipoprotein deficiency (Tangier disease).
Nofer Jerzy-Roch, Herminghaus Grazyna, Brodde Martin, Morgenstern Eberhard, Rust Stephan, Engel Thomas, Seedorf Udo, Assmann Gerd, Bluethmann Horst, Kehrel Beate E
The Journal of biological chemistry
ATP binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) is involved in regulation of intracellular lipid trafficking and export of cholesterol from cells to high density lipoproteins. ABCA1 defects cause Tangier disease, a disorder characterized by absence of high density lipoprotein and thrombocytopenia. In the present study we have demonstrated that ABCA1 is expressed in human platelets and that fibrinogen binding and CD62 surface expression in response to collagen and low concentrations of thrombin, but not to ADP, are defective in platelets from Tangier patients and ABCA1-deficient animals. The expression of platelet membrane receptors such as GPVI, alpha2beta1 integrin, and GPIIb/IIIa, the collagen-induced changes in phosphatidylserine and cholesterol distribution, and the collagen-induced signal transduction examined by phosphorylation of LAT and p72syk and by intracellular Ca2+ mobilization were unaltered in Tangier platelets. The electron microscopy of Tangier platelets revealed reduced numbers of dense bodies and the presence of giant granules typically encountered in platelets from Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Further studies demonstrated impaired release of dense body content in platelets from Tangier patients and ABCA1-deficient animals. In addition, Tangier platelets were characterized by defective surface exposure of dense body and lysosomal markers (CD63, LAMP-1, LAMP-2, CD68) during collagen- and thrombin-induced stimulation and by abnormally high lysosomal pH. We conclude that intact ABCA1 function is necessary for proper maturation of dense bodies in platelets. The impaired release of the content of dense bodies may explain the defective activation of Tangier platelets by collagen and low concentrations of thrombin, but not by ADP.15160437
Use of CD63 expression as marker of in vitro basophil activation in identifying the culprit in insect venom allergy.
Eberlein-König B, Rakoski J, Behrendt H, Ring J
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology : official organ of the International Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología
The diagnosis of insect venom allergy and the indication for specific immunotherapy is based on history, skin tests and demonstration of hymenoptera venom specific IgE-antibodies. In cases with contradictory test results additional cellular tests are recommended.
We evaluated the usefulness of a newly introduced test based on basophil CD63 expression as marker of activation in comparison with the basophil histamine release test (BHR) and the cellular antigen stimulation test (CAST) measuring leukotriene release.
In 14 patients (10 males, 4 females; age; 12 to 67 years, mean: 42.5 +/- 15.1 years) with systemic reactions to hymenoptera stings in their history skin tests and determination of specific IgE-antibodies (CAP-RAST-FEIA) had shown inconsistent results: No demonstration of specific IgE-antibodies (n = 4), one sting by an unknown insect together with positive skin test and/or positive RAST to both bee and wasp venom (n = 4), several stings of partly unknown insects with positive skin test and/or demonstrable specific IgE-antibodies to more than one insect venom (n = 4), uncertain history and divergent results in skin test and/or RAST (n = 2). BHR, CAST and basophil activation test (BAT) were done according to the manufacturers with negative and positive controls and different concentrations of bee and wasp venom. The BAT is based on double staining with anti-IgE antibodies and anti-CD63 and subsequent determination of the percentage of activated basophils by flow cytometry.
BAT and skin test were concordant in 42.9%, BAT and RAST in 57.1%. Concordance of all three cellular tests was seen in 57.1%, of BAT and BHR in 69.1%, of BAT and CAST in 78.6% and of BHR and CAST in 64.3%. In 6 cases where the three cellular tests (BHR, CAST, BAT) were not in accordance the addition of BAT led to a more reliable diagnostic result concerning the relevant insect in 3 cases and added no further information in 3 cases. BAT in controls always was negative. Correlation between CAST and BAT was higher than between CAST and BHR.
In difficult cases of hymenoptera allergy, where history, skin tests and determination of specific antibodies do not allow a clear decision regarding the relevant insect species for immunotherapy, the additional performance of cellular tests (CAST and BAT) may be helpful.15155622
Virulent and avirulent strains of Francisella tularensis prevent acidification and maturation of their phagosomes and escape into the cytoplasm in human macrophages.
Clemens Daniel L, Lee Bai-Yu, Horwitz Marcus A
Infection and immunity
Francisella tularensis, the agent of tularemia, is an intracellular pathogen, but little is known about the compartment in which it resides in human macrophages. We have examined the interaction of a recent virulent clinical isolate of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis and the live vaccine strain with human macrophages by immunoelectron and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. We assessed the maturation of the F. tularensis phagosome by examining its acquisition of the lysosome-associated membrane glycoproteins (LAMPs) CD63 and LAMP1 and the acid hydrolase cathepsin D. Two to four hours after infection, vacuoles containing live F. tularensis cells acquired abundant staining for LAMPs but little or no staining for cathepsin D. However, after 4 h, the colocalization of LAMPs with live F. tularensis organisms declined dramatically. In contrast, vacuoles containing formalin-killed bacteria exhibited intense staining for all of these late endosomal/lysosomal markers at all time points examined (1 to 16 h). We examined the pH of the vacuoles 3 to 4 h after infection by quantitative immunogold staining and by fluorescence staining for lysosomotropic agents. Whereas phagosomes containing killed bacteria stained intensely for these agents, indicating a marked acidification of the phagosomes (pH 5.5), phagosomes containing live F. tularensis did not concentrate these markers and thus were not appreciably acidified (pH 6.7). An ultrastructural analysis of the F. tularensis compartment revealed that during the first 4 h after uptake, the majority of F. tularensis bacteria reside within phagosomes with identifiable membranes. The cytoplasmic side of the membranes of approximately 50% of these phagosomes was coated with densely staining fibrils of approximately 30 nm in length. In many cases, these coated phagosomal membranes appeared to bud, vesiculate, and fragment. By 8 h after infection, the majority of live F. tularensis bacteria lacked any ultrastructurally discernible membrane separating them from the host cell cytoplasm. These results indicate that F. tularensis initially enters a nonacidified phagosome with LAMPs but without cathepsin D and that the phagosomal membrane subsequently becomes morphologically disrupted, allowing the bacteria to gain direct access to the macrophagic cytoplasm. The capacity of F. tularensis to alter the maturation of its phagosome and to enter the cytoplasm is likely an important element of its capacity to parasitize macrophages and has major implications for vaccine development.15143466
Release of anti-HIV mediators after administration of leukotriene B4 to humans.
Flamand Louis, Borgeat Pierre, Lalonde Richard, Gosselin Jean
The Journal of infectious diseases
CD8(+) T cells can control human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) through the lysis of infected cells and the release of soluble mediators, such as macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1 beta, which prevent entry of HIV and/or inhibit HIV replication. Because neutrophils represent a major source of alpha-defensins and, to a lesser extent, MIP-1 beta, we determined whether leukotriene B(4) (LTB(4)), a potent neutrophil agonist, would trigger the release of these 2 anti-HIV peptides.
Plasma samples from HIV-uninfected subjects receiving intravenous bolus of LTB(4) were analyzed for alpha-defensins and MIP-1 beta levels by use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Furthermore, in vitro analysis of intracellular and secreted levels of alpha-defensins of resting and LTB(4)-activated neutrophils from HIV-uninfected and HIV-infected subjects were determined. LTB(4) modulation of CD63 and CD66b markers associated with degranulation were studied by use of flow cytometry. Chemotaxis of neutrophils from HIV-uninfected and HIV-infected subjects toward LTB(4) or interleukin (IL)-8 was determined by use of migration assays.
Administration of LTB(4) to humans caused a dose-dependent plasmatic increase in alpha-defensins and MIP-1 beta proteins, with peak levels observed 2 h after administration of LTB(4). Neutrophils isolated from HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected subjects contained similar levels of stored alpha-defensins that were effectively secreted in vitro, in response to LTB(4) activation. Chemotaxis of neutrophils toward LTB(4) or IL-8 was identical among the groups of subjects.
LTB(4) induced the secretion alpha-defensins and MIP-1 beta. Neutrophils from HIV-infected subjects were fully responsive to LTB(4), which highlights a potential usefulness of this lipid mediator in the management of HIV infection.15140999
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag contains a dileucine-like motif that regulates association with multivesicular bodies.
Lindwasser O Wolf, Resh Marilyn D
Journal of virology
Multivesicular bodies (MVBs) are cholesterol-enriched organelles formed by the endocytic pathway. The topology of vesicle formation in MVBs is identical to that of retroviral budding from the plasma membrane, and budding of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) into MVBs in macrophages has recently been visualized. The Gag proteins from HIV-1, as well as many other retroviruses, contain short motifs that mediate interactions with MVBs and other endocytic components, suggesting that Gag proteins directly interface with the endocytic pathway. Here, we show that HIV-1 Gag contains an internalization signal that promotes endocytosis of a chimeric transmembrane fusion protein. Mutation of this motif within Gag strongly inhibits virus-like particle production. Moreover, wild-type Gag, but not the internalization-defective mutation, can be induced to accumulate within CD63-positive MVBs by treatment of cells with U18666A, a drug that redistributes cholesterol from the plasma membrane to MVBs. We propose that HIV-1 Gag contains a signal that promotes interaction with the cellular endocytic machinery and that the site of particle production is regulated by the subcellular distribution of cholesterol.15140583
Lack of uniform platelet activation in patients after ischemic stroke and choice of antiplatelet therapy.
Serebruany Victor L, Malinin Alex I, Oshrine Benjamin R, Sane David C, Takserman Aviv, Atar Dan, Hennekens Charles H
Thrombosis research
Platelets play an important role in the natural history of ischemic stroke, and are known to be activated in the acute phase. Although aspirin reduces risks of myocardial infarction, stroke and cardiovascular death, the extent of platelet action and the effect of aspirin on platelet function in patients recovering from stroke remain unclear.
We studied 120 individuals divided into three equal groups: aspirin-free patients after ischemic stroke, post-stroke patients receiving aspirin (81-650 mg/daily), and aspirin-free subjects with multiple risk factors for vascular disease. Conventional platelet aggregation induced by 5 microM ADP and 5 microM epinephrine, cartridge-based analyzers (Ultegra, and PFA-100) readings, and expression of CD31, CD41a, CD42b, GPIIb/IIIa activity, CD51/CD61, CD62p, CD63, CD107a, CD154, CD165, formation of platelet-monocyte aggregates, intact (SPAN12), and cleaved (WEDE15) PAR-1 thrombin receptors by flow cytometry were analyzed.
There were no differences between aspirin-free post-stroke patients and aspirin-free controls. Although aggregation was slightly higher, 12 out of the 14 receptor analyses, were surprisingly lower in the post-stroke cohort. Aspirin-treated patients exhibited highly significant inhibition of epinephrine-induced aggregation (p=0.0001), prolongation of the closure time (p=0.03), and reduction of the aspirin reactive units (p=0.02) measured by the Ultegra device. In addition, surface platelet expression of thrombospondin (p=0.001), GPIIb/IIIa activity (p=0.04), P-selectin (p=0.03), CD40-ligand (p=0.04), CD165 (p=0.02), the formation of the platelet-monocyte aggregates (p=0.01), and intact epitope of PAR-1 thrombin receptor (p=0.03) were significantly lower in the aspirin-treated group.
Platelets are not activated in aspirin-free patients after ischemic stroke. Platelet function is significantly inhibited in those treated with aspirin when compared with healthy subjects with risk factors for vascular disease. Bleeding complications and hemorrhagic transformations after aggressive antiplatelet regimens could be related to the decreased or normal baseline platelet characteristics in such patients. Further analysis of platelet heterogeneity and its clinical significance remains to be determined in randomized trials.
Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.15140074
Co-localization of beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides and coarse melanin in macrophage-melanoma fusion hybrids and human melanoma cells in vitro.
Rupani Reena, Handerson Tamara, Pawelek John
Pigment cell research / sponsored by the European Society for Pigment Cell Research and the International Pigment Cell Society
Fusion hybrids between normal macrophages and Cloudman S91 melanoma cells were shown earlier to have increased metastatic potential, along with high expression of beta1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V and beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides. Curiously, hybrids, but not parental melanoma cells, also produced 'coarse melanin'- autophagic vesicles with multiple melanosomes. As beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides were known to be associated with metastasis, and coarse melanin had been described in invasive human melanomas, we looked for potential relationships between the two. Using lectin- and immunohistochemistry, we analyzed cell lines producing coarse melanin for beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides: gp100/pmel-17 (a melanosomal structural component) and CD63 (a late endosome/lysosome component associated with melanoma and certain other human cancers). Cell lines used in this study were (i) hybrid 94-H48, a highly metastatic, macrophage-melanoma experimental fusion hybrid; (ii) 6(neo) mouse melanoma cells, the weakly metastatic, parental fusion partner; and (iii) SKmel-23, a human melanoma cell line derived from a metastasis. Coarse melanin granules were prominent both in hybrids and in SKmel-23 cells, and co-localized with stains for beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides, gp100/pmel 17, and CD63. This is the first report of this phenotype being expressed in vitro, although co-expression of beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides and coarse melanin was recently shown to be a common and pervasive characteristic in archival specimens of human melanomas, and was most prominent in metastases. The results suggest that pathways of melanogenesis in melanoma may differ significantly from those in normal melanocytes. In vitro expression of this phenotype provides new biological systems for more detailed analyses of its genesis and regulation at the molecular genetic level.15133864
Different therapy for different types of ulcerative colitis in China.
Jiang Xue-Liang, Cui Hui-Fei
World journal of gastroenterology : WJG
To study the different therapy for different types of ulcerative colitis (UC) in China.
Among 102 UC patients, 42 chronic relapse type UC patients were randomly divided into olsalazine sodium treatment group (n=21) and SASP group (n=21). Clinical effects and safety were observed in the 2 groups. Forty-two first episode type UC patients were randomly divided into Heartleaf houttuynia herb treatment group (n=21) and SASP group (n=21). Clinical effects were observed in the 2 groups while ultrastructure of colonic mucosa, ICAM-1 and the pressure of distant colon were studied in Heartleaf houttuynia herb group. Eighteen patients (8 males, 10 females) with refractory UC and unresponsive to high-dose prednisolone and sulfasalazine therapy more than one month were treated with Kangshuanling (7200 U/d). Prednisolone was gradually stopped and sulfasalazine was maintained. Stool frequency, rectal bleeding, colonoscopy, general well-being, histology were observed and CD62p, CD63, CD54, Pgp-170 (flow cytometry), TXA2 (RIA), blood platelet aggregation rate and thrombosis length in vitro were assessed.
In the 42 chronic relapse type UC patients, the overall clinical effects of olsalazine sodium group (complete remission in 16, improvement in 4, inefficiency in 1) were better than those of SASP group (complete remission in 10, improvement in 4, inefficiency in 7, P<0.05). Symptomatic remission of olsalazine sodium group (complete remission in 15, partial remission in 5, inefficiency in 1) was better than that of SASP group (complete remission in 10, partial remission in 5, inefficiency in 6, P<0.05). The colonoscopic remission of olsalazine sodium group(complete remission in 11, partial remission in 9, inefficiency in 1) was better than that of SASP group (complete remission in 7, partial remission in 8, inefficiency in 6, P<0.05). The histologic remission of olsalazine sodium group (complete remission in 13, partial remission in 7, inefficiency in in 1) was better than that of SASP group (complete remission in 6, partial remission in 10, inefficiency in 5, P<0.05). The side effects of gastrointestinal tract in olsalazine sodium group were less than those of SASP group except for frequency of watery diarrhea. No other side effects were observed in olsalazine sodium group while ALT increase, WBC decrease and skin eruption were observed in SASP group. Two patients relapsed in olsalazine sodium group while 8 cases relapsed in SASP group during the flow-up period (from six months to one year). In the 42 first episode type UC patients, the clinical effect of Heartleaf houttuynia herb group (complete remission in 20, 95.2%; improvement in 1, 4.8%) was better than that of SASP group (complete remission in 15, 72.4%, improvement in 5, 23.8%; inefficiency in 1, 3.8%, P<0.01). The time of stool frequency recovering to normal (5.6+/-3.3 d), and blood stool disappearance (6.7+/-3.8 d) and abdominal pain disappearance (6.1+/-3.5 d) in Heartleaf houttuynia herb group was all shorter than that in SASP group (9.5+/-4.9 d, 11.7+/-6.1 d, 10.6+/-5.3 d, P<0.01). Heartleaf houttuynia herb could inhibit the epithelial cell apoptosis of colonic mucous membrane and the expression of ICAM-1 (45.8+/-5.7% vs 30.7+/-4.1%, P<0.05). Compared with normal persons, the mean promotive speed of contraction wave stepped up (4.6+/-1.6 cm/min vs 3.2+/-1.8 cm/min, P<0.05) and the mean amplitude of the wave decreased (14.2+/-9.3 kPa vs 18.4+/-8.0 kPa, P<0.05) in active UC patients. After treatment with Heartleaf houttuynia herb, these 2 indexes improved significantly (17.3+/-8.3 kPa, 3.7+/-1.7 cm/min, P<0.05). In normal persons, the postprandial pressure of sigmoid (2.9 +/-0.9 kPa) was higher than that of descending colon (2.0+/-0.7 kPa) and splenic flexure (1.7+/-0.6 kPa), while the colonic pressure (1.5+/-0.5 kPa, 1.4+/-0.6 kPa, 1.3+/-0.6 kPa) decreased significantly (P<0.05) in active UC patients. After treatment with Heartleaf houttuynia herb, the colonic pressure (2.6+/-0.8 kPa, 1.8+/-0.6 kPa, 1.6+/-0.5 kPa) recovered to normal. The pain threshold Heartleaf houttuynia herb, the colonic pressure (2.6+/-0.8 kPa, 1.8+/-0.6 kPa, 1.6+/-0.5 kPa) recovered to normal. The pain threshold of distant colon (67.3+/-18.9 mL) in active UC patients decreased significantly compared with that of normal persons (216.2+/-40.8 mL, P<0.05) and recovered to normal after treatment with Heartleaf houttuynia herb(187.4+/-27.2 mL, P<0.05). In the 18 refractory UC patients with platelet activation, after more than 4 wk of combined Kangshuanling and sulfasalazine therapy, 16 patients achieved clinical remission, with a highly significant statistical difference (P<0.01) between pre-and post-treatment mean scores for all disease parameters: stool frequency (8.2/d vs 1.6/d), rectal bleeding (score 2.7 vs 0.3), colonoscopy (score 2.6 vs 1.1), histology (score 12.0 vs 5.0), general well being (score 4.0 vs 0.6) and CD62p (8.0+/-3.1% vs 4.1+/-1.8%), CD63 (6.3+/-2.1% vs 3.2+/-1.6%), TXA2 (548+/-85 ng/L vs 390+/-67 ng/L), platelet aggregation rate (43.2+/-10.7% vs 34.8+/-8.1%), thrombosis length in vitro (2.3+/-0.6 cm vs 1.8+/-0.3 cm), CD54 in blood (26.9+/-6.9% vs 14.4+/-5.1%), CD54 in tissues (51.1+/-6.2% vs 23.1+/-4.1%), Pgp-170 in blood (18.9+/-3.9% vs 10.4+/-2.7%), Pgp-170 in tissues (16.5+/-3.2% vs 10.2+/-2.3%, P<0.01 or 0.05).
Based on the characteristics of UC cases in China, different therapy should be given to different types of UC with expected satisfactory results.15130945
CD63 tetraspanin slows down cell migration and translocates to the endosomal-lysosomal-MIICs route after extracellular stimuli in human immature dendritic cells.
Mantegazza Adriana R, Barrio María Marcela, Moutel Sandrine, Bover Laura, Weck Markus, Brossart Peter, Teillaud Jean-Luc, Mordoh José
Blood
We analyzed herein whether members of the tetraspanin superfamily are involved in human immature dendritic cell (DC) functions such as foreign antigen internalization, phagocytosis, and cell migration. We show that CD63, CD9, CD81, CD82, and CD151 are present in immature DCs. Whereas CD9 and CD81 are mostly expressed at the cell surface, CD63 and CD82 are also located in intracellular organelles. Complexes of monoclonal antibody (Mab) FC-5.01-CD63 or Fab-5.01-CD63 were rapidly translocated "outside-in" and followed the endocytic pathway through early endosomes and lysosomes, reaching major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-enriched compartments (MIICs) in less than one hour. Internalization of CD63 was also observed during Saccharomyces cerevisiae phagocytosis. Moreover, an association of CD63 with the beta-glycan receptor dectin-1 was observed. Mabs against CD9, CD63, CD81, and CD82 enhanced by 50% the migration induced by the chemokines macrophage inflammatory protein-5 (MIP-5) and MIP-1alpha. Concomitantly, Mabs against CD63 and CD82 diminished the surface expression of CD29, CD11b, CD18, and alpha5 integrins. By immunoprecipitation experiments we found that CD63 associated with integrins CD11b and CD18. These results suggest that CD9, CD63, CD81, and CD82 could play a role in modulating the interactions between immature DCs and their environment, slowing their migratory ability. However, only CD63 would intervene in the internalization of complex antigens.15126944
Do we have suitable in-vitro diagnostic tests for the diagnosis of food allergy?
Eigenmann Philippe A
Current opinion in allergy and clinical immunology
Positive standardized food challenges represent the gold standard of diagnostic procedures in food-related reactions suspected to be of allergic nature. Skin prick testing and in-vitro diagnosis is helpful in most cases and can help to avoid cumbersome food challenges. This review considers recent progress in the use of in-vitro tests in the diagnosis of food allergy.
Recent studies have addressed the characterization of 'new' food allergens which might now be used more accurately in the in-vitro diagnosis of food allergy. Additionally, while in-vitro tests must always be interpreted in line with the allergen tested and the clinical history, levels of food-specific immunoglobulin E can be correlated with the outcome of challenges to foods such as tree nuts as well as egg, according to two recent studies. Finally, epitope binding patterns of specific food allergens might help to predict which patients will most likely outgrow their food allergy, or which patients are clinically tolerant. This might help to avoid food challenges, which carry a risk for a potentially severe outcome.
Recent studies of in-vitro diagnosis of food allergy have helped to provide safer and more accurate tests in the diagnosis and prognosis of food allergy.15121567
Platelet activation, sympathetic tone, and plasma volume in nulligravid women of reproductive age.
Damron Dana P, Bouchard Beth A, Shapiro Robert E, Schonberg Adrienne L, Bernstein Ira M
Obstetrics and gynecology
Preeclampsia is associated with increased platelet activation, increased sympathetic activity, and decreased plasma volume. We sought to estimate the relationship of plasma volume, sympathetic activity, or both to platelet activation in nonpregnant nulligravid women.
We studied 37 healthy nulligravid subjects during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. After intravenous access was obtained, subjects rested in the supine position for 15 minutes. Blood was drawn without venous constriction for measurement of plasma catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) and complete blood count. Antigenic markers of platelet activation, CD63 and CD61-CD14 (platelet-monocyte aggregates), were measured with flow cytometry. Plasma volume was estimated in the supine position by using Evans blue dye and is expressed in milliliters and corrected for body mass index (BMI). We compared data from the lowest plasma volume/BMI quartile with the 2 middle quartiles combined and with the upper quartile. Data are expressed as mean +/- standard deviation. P <.05 was considered significant.
Subjects were aged 26.5 +/- 5.0 years, BMI was 24.0 +/- 3.0 kg/m(2), and plasma volume was 2,685 +/- 429 mL. We identified no significant relationship of platelet concentration to plasma volume/BMI between quartile groups (P =.944). However, there was a significant difference between quartiles for %CD63 expression (P =.013) and for CD61/CD14 expression (P =.018), with the lowest quartile demonstrating elevated platelet activation.
We found evidence that enhanced platelet activation is associated with reduced plasma volume, but not with plasma catecholamine concentrations. There was no association of platelet concentration with reduced plasma volume. We speculate that elements of the clinical syndrome of preeclampsia coexist as a subclinical phenotype before pregnancy.15118653
Different levels of platelet activation in preeclamptic, normotensive pregnant, and nonpregnant women.
Holthe Mette R, Staff Anne C, Berge Lillian N, Lyberg Torstein
American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
The aims of our study were to determine the basal platelet activation state in women with preeclampsia compared with normotensive pregnant women and nonpregnant women and to investigate the platelet reactivity on in vitro stimulation with adenosine diphosphate or thrombin receptor activation peptide.
Platelet expression of CD61 (fibrinogen receptor), CD42a (von Willebrand factor receptor), CD62P (P-selectin), CD63 (Glycoprotein 53), and PAC-1 binding (activated fibrinogen receptor) were determined in 20 pairs of women with preeclampsia/normotensive pregnant women and in 12 nonpregnant women, with the use of flow cytometry.
Basal platelet expression of CD61, CD42a and CD62P, and adenosine diphosphate-stimulated CD62P expression were increased in women with preeclampsia compared with normotensive pregnant women. Platelets from women with preeclampsia and normotensive pregnant women differed from platelets from nonpregnant women by expressing higher basal CD63 levels and being more responsive to in vitro agonist stimulation, which was demonstrated by increased expression of CD61, CD62P, and CD63.
This study supports the notion that platelets are important in the pathophysiologic condition of preeclampsia.15105967
Histamine dilutions modulate basophil activation.
Belon P, Cumps J, Ennis M, Mannaioni P F, Roberfroid M, Sainte-Laudy J, Wiegant F A C
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
In order to demonstrate that high dilutions of histamine are able to inhibit basophil activation in a reproducible fashion, several techniques were used in different research laboratories.
The aim of the study was to investigate the action of histamine dilutions on basophil activation.
Basophil activation was assessed by alcian blue staining, measurement of histamine release and CD63 expression. Study 1 used a blinded multi-centre approach in 4 centres. Study 2, related to the confirmation of the multi-centre study by flow cytometry, was performed independently in 3 laboratories. Study 3 examined the histamine release (one laboratory) and the activity of H(2) receptor antagonists and structural analogues (two laboratories).
High dilutions of histamine (10(-30)-10(-38) M) influence the activation of human basophils measured by alcian blue staining. The degree of inhibition depends on the initial level of anti-IgE induced stimulation, with the greatest inhibitory effects seen at lower levels of stimulation. This multicentre study was confirmed in the three laboratories by using flow cytometry and in one laboratory by histamine release. Inhibition of CD63 expression by histamine high dilutions was reversed by cimetidine (effect observed in two laboratories) and not by ranitidine (one laboratory). Histidine tested in parallel with histamine showed no activity on this model.
In 3 different types of experiment, it has been shown that high dilutions of histamine may indeed exert an effect on basophil activity. This activity observed by staining basophils with alcian blue was confirmed by flow cytometry. Inhibition by histamine was reversed by anti-H2 and was not observed with histidine these results being in favour of the specificity of this effect We are however unable to explain our findings and are reporting them to encourage others to investigate this phenomenon.15094937
Effect of ticlopidine on monocyte-derived microparticles and activated platelet markers in diabetes mellitus.
Shouzu Akira, Nomura Shosaku, Omoto Seitaro, Hayakawa Takashi, Nishikawa Mitsushige, Iwasaka Toshiji
Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
Platelet-derived microparticles, activated platelets, and monocyte-derived microparticles were measured in 73 patients with diabetes mellitus. A comparative study of these parameters was performed before and after administration of ticlopidine. The number of platelet-derived microparticles and activated platelets was increased significantly in diabetic patients. Monocyte-derived microparticles were also increased significantly. After administration of ticlopidine, platelet-derived microparticles and activated platelets corrected positively, not only CD62P- and CD63-positive platelets, but also platelet-derived microparticles and monocyte-derived microparticles showed a significant decrease. These data suggest that in patients with diabetes, platelet-derived microparticles and activated platelets stimulate the activation of monocytes and promote the production of monocyte-derived microparticles, and that ticlopidine is useful for hypercoagulabillity in diabetic patients.15085152
Constitutively activated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase primes platelets from patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia for thrombopoietin-induced aggregation.
Kubota Y, Tanaka T, Ohnishi H, Kitanaka A, Okutani Y, Taminato T, Ishida T, Kamano H
Leukemia
In this study, we examined the effect of thrombopoietin (TPO) on the aggregation of platelets from 40 patients with myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), including 17 patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in the chronic phase (CML-CP), 10 with polycythemia vera, 10 with essential thrombocythemia, and three with myelofibrosis. TPO by itself dose-dependently induced the aggregation of platelets from patients with CML-CP but not from those with other MPDs or with CML-CP in cytogenetical complete remission. The expression of CD63 in CML-CP platelets was induced by TPO treatment. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) was constitutively activated in CML-CP platelets. Pretreatment with PI3-kinase inhibitors (wortmannin and LY294002) dose-dependently inhibited TPO-induced aggregation of CML-CP platelets. The Abl kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate and the Jak inhibitor AG490 suppressed TPO-induced aggregation of CML-CP platelets. Pretreatment with imatinib mesylate, but not with AG490, inhibited the activity of PI3-kinase in CML-CP platelets. In addition, tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2 was undetected in CML-CP platelets before TPO treatment. These findings indicate that the constitutive activation of PI3-kinase primes CML-CP platelets for the aggregation induced by TPO, and that Bcr-Abl, but not Jak family protein tyrosine kinases, are involved in the constitutive activation of PI3-kinase in CML-CP platelets.15073033
Rac2 is critical for neutrophil primary granule exocytosis.
Abdel-Latif Dalia, Steward Melissa, Macdonald Dawn L, Francis Gordon A, Dinauer Mary C, Lacy Paige
Blood
Neutrophil degranulation is important in many inflammatory disorders, although the intracellular mechanisms underlying this process remain poorly understood. The Rho GTPase, Rac2, has been implicated in control of degranulation in earlier studies. We hypothesized that Rac2 selectively regulates neutrophil primary granule release. Using bone marrow and peritoneal exudate neutrophils from rac2(-/-) mice in comparison with similar cells from wild-type C57Bl/6 mice, we found that primary granule myeloperoxidase and elastase release was absent in Rac2(-/-) neutrophils in response to chemoattractant stimulation, cytochalasin B/f-Met-Leu-Phe (CB/fMLP), and CB/leukotriene B4. Rac2(-/-) neutrophils also failed to exhibit mobilization of the primary granule marker CD63+ during CB/fMLP stimulation as determined by confocal microscopy. Priming of Rac2(-/-) neutrophils with tumor necrosis factor (TNF) or by peritoneal elicitation did not rescue the defect in primary granule release. However, phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase in Rac2(-/-) neutrophils was evident in response to CB/fMLP and/or TNF. Primary granule density and morphology were normal in Rac2(-/-) neutrophils. Secondary specific and tertiary granule release, measured by lactoferrin immunoassay and zymography, was normal in response to CB/fMLP and adhesion to fibronectin. These findings suggest an obligatory role for Rac2 in regulation of primary granule release by neutrophils.15066953
Rapid regulation of platelet activation in vivo by nitric oxide.
Schäfer Andreas, Wiesmann Frank, Neubauer Stefan, Eigenthaler Martin, Bauersachs Johann, Channon Keith M
Circulation
Platelet activation is a feature of many cardiovascular diseases characterized by endothelial dysfunction. The mechanistic relationship between impaired systemic nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability and platelet activation in vivo remains unclear. We investigated whether acute inhibition of NO production in humans modulates platelet activation in vivo and whether exogenous NO would counteract such an effect.
Intravenous injection of the NO synthase inhibitor N(G)-monomethyl-l-arginine in healthy volunteers resulted in NO synthase inhibition as detected by increased blood pressure and by significantly reduced phosphorylation of platelet vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein, an indicator of NO signaling. NO synthase inhibition increased platelet activation as determined by enhanced platelet binding of fibrinogen and surface expression of P-selectin, glycoprotein 53, and CD40 ligand, demonstrating tonic inhibition of platelet activation by NO production in vivo. Sublingual administration of the NO donor glyceryl trinitrate normalized platelet VASP phosphorylation and restored markers of platelet activation to baseline levels.
Acute inhibition of endogenous NO production in humans causes rapid platelet activation in vivo, which is reversed by exogenous NO, demonstrating that platelet function in vivo is rapidly regulated by NO bioavailability.15060419
Assessment of platelet activation in myeloproliferative disorders with complementary techniques.
Bermejo Emilse, Alberto Maria F, Meschengieser Susana S, Lazzari Maria A
Blood coagulation & fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
Bleeding and thrombosis in myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) are common events, sometimes both are present in the same patient during the course of the disease. Platelet activation in patients with MPD is often suggested. The present study analyses the presence of circulating activated platelets, using simultaneously flow cytometry and aggregometric studies in MPD. We studied 28 patients: 13 with polycythaemia vera, seven with essential thrombocythaemia, and eight chronic myeloid leukaemia. We performed functional tests, aggregation and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) release and flow cytometric assays (mepacrine staining and platelet activation markers CD62, CD63 and fibrinogen binding (B-FG)). Twenty-one MPD samples (75%) had reduced aggregation and ATP release. Acquired delta-SPD was detected in 11 of 28 MPD patients (39%), and we found no association between reduced mepacrine labelling and abnormal ATP release. High levels of activation markers were obtained: CD62 in 19 of 28 patients (68%), CD63 in 13 of 28 patients (46%) and B-FG in 19 of 28 patients (68%). The most prevalent abnormality was a reduced aggregation and ATP release. The lack of association between ATP release and mepacrine labelling suggests that other mechanisms, besides the deficit of intraplatelet ATP/adenosine diphosphate, might occur. High levels of activation markers were also observed. We conclude that both tests are complementary and necessary to understand the functional status of platelets in MPD.15051738
Localization of the AP-3 adaptor complex defines a novel endosomal exit site for lysosomal membrane proteins.
Peden Andrew A, Oorschot Viola, Hesser Boris A, Austin Cary D, Scheller Richard H, Klumperman Judith
The Journal of cell biology
The adaptor protein (AP) 3 adaptor complex has been implicated in the transport of lysosomal membrane proteins, but its precise site of action has remained controversial. Here, we show by immuno-electron microscopy that AP-3 is associated with budding profiles evolving from a tubular endosomal compartment that also exhibits budding profiles positive for AP-1. AP-3 colocalizes with clathrin, but to a lesser extent than does AP-1. The AP-3- and AP-1-bearing tubular compartments contain endocytosed transferrin, transferrin receptor, asialoglycoprotein receptor, and low amounts of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor and the lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs) 1 and 2. Quantitative analysis revealed that of these distinct cargo proteins, only LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 are concentrated in the AP-3-positive membrane domains. Moreover, recycling of endocytosed LAMP-1 and CD63 back to the cell surface is greatly increased in AP-3-deficient cells. Based on these data, we propose that AP-3 defines a novel pathway by which lysosomal membrane proteins are transported from tubular sorting endosomes to lysosomes.15043942
Differentially expressed genes that encode potential markers of goldfish macrophage development in vitro.
Barreda Daniel R, Hanington Patrick C, Walsh Colin K, Wong Paul, Belosevic Miodrag
Developmental and comparative immunology
Primary kidney macrophage (PKM) cultures derived from goldfish hematopoietic tissues develop from early progenitors to mature macrophages in response to endogenous growth factor(s). When grown in vitro, PKM shift from a proliferative phase, where most of the proliferation and differentiation events take place, to a senescence phase, where there is cessation of proliferation and differentiation events and ultimately cell death through a process of apoptosis. The phenotypic changes of PKM from the proliferative to senescence phase are a reflection of specific changes in gene expression; therefore, comparison of gene expression patterns between the two phases should lead to the identification of macrophage genes directly involved in the positive and negative regulation of hematopoietic events, as well as genes that are modulated downstream from these regulatory points. Differential cross-screening of the proliferative phase PKM cDNA library using proliferative and senescence phase (32)P-labeled cDNA probes identified several differentially expressed genes. Specifically, initial screen of 9200 clones yielded 734 differential primary clones that were isolated and analyzed using a PCR-based secondary screen. The majority of these clone isolates encoded a single transcript as determined by PCR amplification of the primary clones. The secondary screen confirmed the differential expression of 306 clones (3.32% of the total number of screened clones). Two hundred and forty four clones were sequenced; 158 and 86 were preferentially expressed during proliferative and senescence phases, respectively. Several potential candidates of fish macrophage hematopoiesis were identified. These include, for example, zinc finger protein 147, nucleophosmin, 14-3-3 protein, adenine nucleotide translocator 2 (ANT2), granulin, survivin-1, and apoptosis inhibitor-5. In addition, several potential markers of macrophage differentiation and/or function were identified and their expression patterns characterized across three distinct stages of macrophage development in vitro. These include legumain, CD63, interferon-inducible protein, macrosialin (CD68), transcription factor MafB, and the molecular chaperone BiP/GRP78. These analyses will facilitate future characterization of macrophage developmental events by providing a more global perspective of various facets of macrophage hematopoiesis.15037221
Sulfur mustard primes phagocytosis and degranulation in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
Vavra Ashley K, Laurent Cecilia J, Ngo Vinh, Sweeney John F, Levitt Jonathan M
International immunopharmacology
Sulfur mustard (2,2'-bis-chloroethyl-sulfide; SM) is a chemical warfare vesicant that causes debilitating skin lesions. Although a great deal of work has focused on the direct effects of SM exposure on the epithelium, it is unclear how much the inflammatory response, induced by exposure, contributes to lesion pathogenesis. Keratinocytes exposed to SM express a number of inflammatory mediators and elicit a cellular infiltrate consisting largely of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN). PMN infiltration into SM lesions occurs as early as 30 min and peaks after several hours postexposure, and, despite the relatively short half-life of SM, PMN infiltrating a lesion could be exposed to micromolar concentrations of the agent. Previously, we have shown that exposure to low doses of sulfur mustard prime oxidative function in human PMN. The current study was undertaken to evaluate the effects of low-dose SM exposure on PMN phagocytosis, degranualtion and chemotaxis. PMN exposed to low doses of SM (50-200 microM) showed a dose-dependent enhancement of phagocytic function. Exocytosis of PMN azurophilic and specific granules [determined by analysis of granule-specific intravesicular receptors, Interleukin 10 receptor (IL-10R) and CD63] was also enhanced by SM exposure. Finally, we examined the effect of SM as a chemoattractant for PMN and show that SM is not itself a chemotaxin. These results suggest that SM injury may, in part, be caused by normal inflammatory function, and that therapeutic strategies aimed at down-regulating PMN activation could lessen the severity of SM injury and the time required for its resolution.15025679
Improved metabolic control decreases platelet activation markers in patients with type-2 diabetes.
Eibl N, Krugluger W, Streit G, Schrattbauer K, Hopmeier P, Schernthaner G
European journal of clinical investigation
Cardiovascular disease is associated with platelet dysfunction in patients with diabetes. Hyperglycaemia is known as an independent risk factor for micro- and macrovascular complications, and improvement of metabolic control has shown beneficial effects on diabetic late complications. Our study attempts to clarify the effect of improved metabolic control on platelet activation markers in patients with type-2 diabetes.
Thirty patients were studied at baseline and 3 months after improvement of metabolic control and compared with an age-matched nondiabetic control group. Platelet activation markers (CD31, CD36, CD49b, CD62P and CD63) were assessed by flow cytometry analysis.
Significantly more activated platelets were detected in patients with diabetes compared with controls. After 3 months' improvement of metabolic control, a significant decline of all platelet activation markers except CD36 was noted. Furthermore a significant correlation between CD62P, CD63 and HbA(1c) levels was observed.
We conclude therefore that improvement of metabolic control has a beneficial effect on platelet activation. This may have an implication in the pathogenesis of vascular disease in patients with type-2 diabetes.15016127
Platelet activation in heart transplant recipients.
Hognestad Aina, Michelsen Annika, Brosstad Frank, Damås Jan K, Holm Torbjørn, Simonsen Svein, Kjekshus John K, Aukrust Pål, Andreassen Arne K
Clinical transplantation
An inappropriate and persistent immune activation has been suggested to contribute to long-term mortality and morbidity after heart transplantation. Several lines of evidence suggest that platelets do not only promote thrombus formation, but also act as inflammatory cells. In the present study, we investigated if long-time survivors of heart transplantation (mean time since transplantation 6.5 yr) were characterized by enhanced platelet activation as assessed by different experimental approaches. Our main findings when comparing heart transplant recipients (n = 52) and age- and sex-matched healthy controls (n = 38) were: (i) platelets from heart transplant recipients showed enhanced expression of both P-selectin and CD63 as assessed by flow cytometry; (ii) platelets from these patients also contained significantly increased levels of soluble CD40 ligand and tended to release higher levels of this cytokine upon SFLLRN stimulation as assessed by enzyme immunoassay; (iii) heart transplant recipients had increased levels of soluble P-selectin in platelet-free plasma; and (iv) the enhanced platelet activation after heart transplantation was most pronounced in those with concomitant hypertension. These findings suggest that long-term survivors of heart transplantation are characterized by enhanced activation of platelets, possibly contributing to the persistent immune activation and clinical complications in these patients.15013360
Young male smokers have altered platelets and endothelium that precedes atherosclerosis.
Casey R G, Joyce M, Roche-Nagle G, Cox D, Bouchier-Hayes D J
The Journal of surgical research
Cigarette smoking results in abnormalities of platelets and endothelium with platelet dysfunction implicated in vascular complications. Healthy endothelium plays a pivotal role in regulating hemostasis via the inhibition of platelet activation and aggregation. Thus, we examined if platelet dysfunction correlated with serum vWF levels-a circulating marker of endothelial dysfunction.
We tested this hypothesis in young male smokers. The parameters of platelet function tested included: CD62/CD63; Glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa; Platelet function analzyer (PFA) studies, platelet aggregometry, flow assessment of platelet microparticles, platelet-leukocyte interactions and receptor numbers. Endothelial dysfunction was assessed with serum von Willebrand Factor (vWF).
There was a significant increase in platelet CD62 receptor expression and aggregation with an associated delay in time to aggregation using PFA. Endothelial dysfunction was represented by higher serum levels of von Willebrand Factor. All other platelet parameters tested were within the standardized reference range.
These initial data suggests that anti-platelet therapy may have a role in reduction of platelet activation and aggregation in young smokers and possibly alter vascular endothelial abnormalities.15010227
Identification of the feline CD63 homologue using retrovirus-mediated expression cloning.
Sakurai Yumiko, Shimojima Masayuki, Miyazawa Takayuki, Masuoka Kouta, Tohya Yukinobu, Akashi Hiroomi
Veterinary immunology and immunopathology
Recently, we combined a retrovirus-mediated expression cloning with a simple screening method using non-adherent cells and panning [Anal. Biochem. 315 (2003) 138]. In this study, we applied this method to identify the antigen recognized by an uncharacterized monoclonal antibody raised against a feline cell line, and identified it as the feline homologue of CD63. This simple method is useful for characterizing unknown antibodies that recognize cell surface molecules. Furthermore, the monoclonal antibody identified as an anti-feline CD63 antibody will be useful for studying feline molecular function(s).15005724
In vitro allergy diagnosis: should we follow the flow?
Ebo D G, Hagendorens M M, Bridts C H, Schuerwegh A J, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
During the last 5 years, an increasing number of studies have demonstrated that flow cytometric quantification of in vitro basophil activation can be a quite performant and reliable tool to measure IgE-dependent allergen-specific responses in allergic patients. So far, most assays have used CD63 as a basophil activation marker and native allergen extracts for stimulation. However, other basophil markers and recombinant allergens have recently been introduced. The technique has been applied for the diagnosis of allergy to pollen, house dust mite, food, natural rubber latex, hymenoptera venom and drugs. In addition, the technique has proven to be useful in non-IgE-mediated reactions such as hypersensitivity to drugs as well as detection of auto-antibodies in chronic urticaria. This review will focus on some specific issues: (1) principles of flow cytometric analysis of in vitro-activated basophils, (2) general technical aspects of the technique (including passive sensitization), (3) clinical applications and (4) recommendations for further development and evaluation of the technique.14996202
Variables determining blockage of WBC-depleting filters by Hb sickle cell trait donations.
Beard Martin J, Cardigan Rebecca, Seghatchian Jerard, Krailadsiri Pranee, Williamson Lorna M
Transfusion
Sickle cell trait donations can block leukodepletion (LD) filters or fail to LD, but the variables affecting blockage are unclear.
To identify critical variables for further study, the relationship was investigated between filter blockage and donor characteristics, processing conditions, PLT and coagulation system activation, and microvesicle formation in donations with (n = 63) and without (n = 40) sickle trait. With eight filter types whole blood was LD either at ambient temperature on Day 0 or after overnight 4 degrees C hold. Markers of PLT activation (CD62P and CD63 expression and soluble CD62P) and coagulation activation (activated FXII and prothrombin fragment 1 + 2 [F1 + 2]), RBC microvesicles, blood gases, and residual WBCs were measured.
All Day 0 filtrations blocked (n = 7). On Day 1, no filter tested was 100 percent successful, with most achieving an approximate 50 percent success rate. Two filters blocked consistently and an additional filter did not block, but resulted in 50 percent of units with high residual WBC counts (30 x 10(6)-394 x 10(6)/unit). Day 1 filtration was not improved if performed at 4 degrees C. Donor RBC variables and prefiltration measures varied little between blocked and successful filtrations except pO2, where 9 of 17 blockages had a pO2 of less than 5.0 kPa, compared with 0 of 13 completed filtrations. F1 + 2 levels increased after filtration in sickle trait units, a consequence of slow flow rate.
Filter blockage in sickle trait donors cannot be predicted by donor characteristics or filter type and is not related to PLT or coagulation activation, but can be reduced by storing units at 4 degrees C before filtration.14994369
Immunophenotypic analysis of mast cells in mastocytosis: When and how to do it. Proposals of the Spanish Network on Mastocytosis (REMA).
Escribano Luis, Diaz-Agustin Beatriz, López Antonio, Núñez López Rosa, García-Montero Andrés, Almeida Julia, Prados Aranzazu, Angulo Miguel, Herrero Sonia, Orfao Alberto, None None
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Mastocytosis is a term used for a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by an abnormal proliferation and accumulation of mast cells (MCs) in one or multiple tissues including skin, bone marrow, liver, spleen, and lymph nodes, among others.
In recent years, multiparameter flow cytometric studies have shown that pathologic MCs from patients with mastocytosis display unique aberrant immunophenotypic characteristics as compared with normal MCs.
Among other features, pathologic MCs show aberrant expression of CD25 and CD2 antigens and abnormally high levels of the CD11c and CD35 complement receptors, the CD59 complement regulatory molecule, the CD63 lysosomal membrane antigen, and the CD69 early-activation antigen. In addition, MCs from mastocytosis express abnormally low levels of CD117 and unexpectedly high light scatter and autofluorescence characteristics.
These aberrant immunophenotypic features are of great relevance for the assessment of tissue involvement in mastocytosis with consequences in the diagnosis, classification, and follow-up of the disease and in its differential diagnosis with other entities. In this paper we provide the reader with information for the objective and reproducible identification of pathologic MCs by using quantitative multiparametric flow cytometry, information for their phenotypic characterization, and the criteria currently used for a correct interpretation of the immunophenotypic results obtained.
Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.14985170
Increased platelet CD63 and P-selectin expression persist in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke.
Cha Jae-Kwan, Jo Wol-Soon, Shin Hyun Chul, Bae Hae-Rahn, Ho Jeong-Min, Kim Jae Woo
Platelets
Platelet activation is an important process in the pathogenesis of atherothrombosis. However, the serial changes of platelet activation in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke have not been determined. In this study, we measured serially platelet expression of CD63 and P-selectin and platelet aggregability to ADP and collagen. Measurements were made 24 and 72 h and 7 and 90 days after the ischemic event in 29 patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke. Platelet aggregability was significantly decreased after 72 h compared to that at 24 h of stroke onset. However, platelet CD63 and P-selectin expression remained high even 90 days after the events. These findings suggest that platelet hyperactivation in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke may be sustained for a considerable period.14982522
"Food allergy in adulthood".
Erdmann S M, Sachs B, Merk H F
Allergy
14965171
Platelets activation in patients undergoing PTCA and their responsiveness after in vitro stimulation.
Loudová Martina, Krejsek Jan
Acta medica (Hradec Králové) / Universitas Carolina, Facultas Medica Hradec Králové
We evaluated expression of platelet activation markers in blood samples of 15 patients who underwent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) by flow cytometry. Analysis was performed before the beginning of PTCA, during initial coronary angiography and after the end of PTCA or after a stent placement, respectively. We evaluated platelet-derived microparticles, platelet-leukocyte aggregates, platelet aggregates and a membrane expression of CD62P and CD63 molecules. Responsiveness of platelets to the activation in vitro with thrombin-receptor activating protein-6 (TRAP-6) was tested simultaneously. Statistically significant differences between patient samples were found only in the expression of the activation markers CD62P (before PTCA 0.22%, during 0.39%, after 0.67%), CD63 (0.26%/0.45%/0.85%) and platelet-leukocyte aggregates (13.57%/18.39%/23.63%). In the same group the expression of all constitutive membrane markers was statistically significantly decreased: in patients undergoing PTCA was the expression of CD9: 87.98% (in comparison with control group 94.98%), CD31: 87.10% (92.78%), CD36: 87.37% (90.98%), CD41: 88.09% (95.62%), CD42a: 88.54% (94.98%), CD42a: 88.31% (94.13%).14962761
Assays for measuring in vitro basophil activation induced by recombinant allergens.
Valent Peter, Hauswirth Alexander W, Natter Susanne, Sperr Wolfgang R, Bühring Hans-Jörg, Valenta Rudolf
Methods (San Diego, Calif.)
The diagnosis of type I allergy is essentially based on clinical data, skin tests, and measurements of allergen-specific IgE. However, the determination of specific IgE per se does not permit a definitive conclusion concerning the response of effector cells to the respective allergen(s) and consecutive clinical symptoms in all patients. In an attempt to overcome this problem, a number of basophil-activation assays have been developed during the last few years. Today, allergen-induced activation of blood basophils can be employed as a specific and reliable measure of IgE-dependent responses in sensitized individuals. Using recombinant allergens and basophil-specific markers, these novel assays appear to serve as simple and useful tests in component-resolved diagnosis of type I allergies. In the current article, the biochemical, functional, and technical background of these basophil tests is discussed.14962311
Effect of holding buffy coats 4 or 18 hours before preparing pooled filtered PLT concentrates in plasma.
Pérez-Pujol Sílvia, Lozano Miguel, Perea Dolores, Mazzara Roberto, Ordinas Antonio, Escolar Ginés
Transfusion
Filtered PLT concentrates (PCs) were prepared in plasma pooling three (for children) or six buffy coats (BCs; for adults) after holding them a maximum of 4 hours (blood bags collected in the afternoon) or 18 hours (blood bags collected in the morning).
With flow cytometry, PCs prepared after holding BCs 4 or 18 hours were compared. BCs removed from whole-blood donations in quadruple bag packs ("top-top") were held 4 or 18 hours before pooling them with a sterile connecting device. After the BCs were centrifuged, the supernatant was transferred through a BC filter (Autostop, Pall Medical) to a CLX bag. Samples for analysis were collected from the whole-blood bag, BCs, and PCs immediately after preparation and after 1, 3, 5, and 7 days of storage on a flat-bed agitator at 22 +/- 2 degrees C. The main PLT membrane glycoproteins (GPs, IIb-IIIa, IV, and Ibalpha), some of their ligands (fibrinogen, fibronectin, and VWF), activation-dependent antigens (CD62P and CD63), and procoagulant activity markers (annexin V and bound coagulation FV-Va) have been studied.
In the 12 PCs (six pools of 3 units each group) studied, a minor increase in activation markers during preparation was observed. During the storage, a significant increase in the expression of GPIIb-IIIa, CD62P, CD63, annexin V, and FVa was measured. After 5 days of storage, only the percentage of PLTs with bound fibrinogen was significantly greater in PCs prepared after holding BCs for 4 hours.
In PCs prepared after holding BCs 4 or 18 hours before pooling and filtering, only a minor significant difference in the percentage of PLTs with bound fibrinogen was found after 5 days of storage. This difference is probably of little, if any, transfusional significance.14961162
Platelets in patients with acute ischemic stroke are exhausted and refractory to thrombin, due to cleavage of the seven-transmembrane thrombin receptor (PAR-1).
Jurk Kerstin, Jahn Uli-Rüdiger, Van Aken Hugo, Schriek Carsten, Droste Dirk W, Ritter Martin A, Bernd Ringelstein E, Kehrel Beate E
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Platelet activation is involved in the pathogenesis of cerebrovascular ischemia, but the major agonist involved has yet to be identified. To investigate the role of thrombin in platelet activation in patients with acute ischemic stroke, and while thrombin is the most likely candidate for activation of the thrombin receptor PAR-1 in vivo, we assessed its cleavage and internalization using the antibodies SPAN12, binding to uncleaved PAR-1, and WEDE15, recognizing cleaved and uncleaved, but not internalized PAR-1. In contrast to healthy age-matched controls, platelets from stroke patients exhibited significant cleavage and internalization of PAR-1 (P<0.001) and failed to respond to thrombin in vitro. Enhanced surface expression of CD62P, CD63, TSP-1 and less mepacrine uptake showed platelet degranulation during stroke. Platelets from patients with acute cerebral ischemia are exhausted and desensitized to thrombin through cleavage of PAR-1, indicating that high concentrations of thrombin occur with acute cerebrovascular ischemic events in vivo.14729358
Comparison of morphological and functional characteristics of primary-cultured human conjunctival epithelium and of Wong-Kilbourne derivative of Chang conjunctival cell line.
De Saint Jean M, Baudouin C, Di Nolfo M, Roman S, Lozato P, Warnet J M, Brignole F
Experimental eye research
To analyze the relevance of a human conjunctival cell line in a study of conjunctival epithelium. We investigated and compared the effects of IFNgamma and TNFalpha in a primary culture of human conjunctiva and in a human conjunctival cell line.
A primary-cultured human conjunctival epithelium and a human conjunctival cell line (Chang cells) were treated for 72 hr with 20, 200, 400 and 600 U ml(-1) IFNgamma or with 1100 and 11,000 U ml(-1) TNFalpha. Then, the expression of HLA DR, CD40, CD44, CD63, CD80, CD86, Fas receptor, E-cadherin, ICAM-1, MUC1, cytokeratins and vimentin were investigated by flow cytometry. Cell morphology was studied with phalloidin staining. Apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry with Annexin V and via cell cycle analysis.
The primary culture of human conjunctival epithelium expressed cytokeratin K4, non-keratinized squamous epithelial marker. Chang cells presented a more dedifferentiated phenotype and were cytokeratin K4 negative. In primary-cultured cells, IFNgamma (600 U ml(-1)) induced only a low level of apoptosis and a significant upregulation of most tested proteins such as HLA DR, Fas, ICAM-1, CD40 and CD63. In the Chang cell line, IFNgamma induced a significant level of apoptosis at concentrations of 200, 400 and 600 U ml(-1). HLA DR and CD63 were induced at lower levels than in primary-cultured cells. Other proteins were modified in a similar manner after IFNgamma treatment in both systems. In the primary-cultured cells, TNFalpha induced an important upregulation of ICAM-1, Fas and CD40 whereas CD44 and CD63 were significantly decreased. Conversely, only a very weak alteration of CD63 and ICAM-1 was observed in the Chang cell line after TNFalpha treatment.
A primary culture of a human conjunctival epithelium demonstrated well-defined epithelial features. TNFalpha and IFNgamma, two inflammatory cytokines, induced different effects in both cellular systems, in a primary-cultured conjunctival epithelium and a human conjunctival cell line. Inflammation-related molecules were highly upregulated in the primary culture and, to a lesser extent, in the Chang cell line. Thus, the Chang cell line differs in certain features from a primary culture of human conjunctival epithelium, a fact which emphasizes the complexity of interpretation of in vitro data and this should be taken into consideration in in vitro studies of human conjunctival epithelium.14728824
[The relationship between the peripheral blood of CD61, CD63, PAC-1 and the transplant kidney function].
Zhang Yong, Guan De-lin, Xia Cheng-qing, Han Zhi-you, Xu Jian-jun, Gao Ju-zhong, Wu Ke-rang
Zhonghua wai ke za zhi [Chinese journal of surgery]
To explore the relationships between the peripheral blood levels of CD61, CD63, PAC-1 and the incidence of acute rejection and tubular necrosis after renal transplantation, and recovery of the graft function.
The peripheral blood levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 of 86 patients with uremia in different stages before and after transplantations were analyzed by flow cytometry. The patients were divided into three groups: (1) twenty-nine patients with normal grafts function, (2) hirty with acute rejection and (3) twenty-seven with acute tubular necrosis. The patients with acute rejection were randomly divided into treatment group with anticoagulants and cntrol group.
The peripheral blood levels of CD61, CD63 and PAC-1 significantly increased (P < 0.05) in the patients with acute rejection, in comparison with those with normal grafts function and those with acute tubular necrosis. The peripheral blood levels of CD61, CD63 and PAC-1 in patients with acute rejection in anticoagulants therapy was lower, recovery time of the grafts function was shorter, one-year survival rates of patients and grafts were higher, as compared with those of controls.
The patients with acute rejection have significantly high peripheral blood levels of CD61, CD63 and PAC-1 before transplantation, however, these values in patients with acute tubular necrosis are not high, this suggesting that acute rejection might relate to platelet activation, while acute tubular necrosis might not relate to it. After anticoagulants therapy in patients with acute rejection, the grafts function might recover faster and their one-year survival rates and grafts might be higher in those with CD61, CD63 and PAC-1 decreasing remarkably.14722309
Cell-type-dependent targeting of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly to the plasma membrane and the multivesicular body.
Ono Akira, Freed Eric O
Journal of virology
The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) assembly-and-release pathway begins with the targeting of the Gag precursor to the site of virus assembly. The molecular mechanism by which Gag is targeted to the appropriate subcellular location remains poorly understood. Based on the analysis of mutant Gag proteins, we and others have previously demonstrated that a highly basic patch in the matrix (MA) domain of Gag is a major determinant of Gag transport to the plasma membrane. In this study, we determined that in HeLa and T cells, the MA mutant Gag proteins that are defective in plasma membrane targeting form virus particles in a CD63-positive compartment, defined as the late endosome or multivesicular body (MVB). Interestingly, we find that in primary human macrophages, both wild-type (WT) and MA mutant Gag proteins are targeted specifically to the MVB. Despite the fact that particle assembly in macrophages occurs at an intracellular site rather than at the plasma membrane, we observe that WT Gag expressed in this cell type is released as extracellular virions with high efficiency. These results demonstrate that Gag targeting to and assembly in the MVB are physiologically important steps in HIV-1 virus particle production in macrophages and that particle release in this cell type may follow an exosomal pathway. To determine whether Gag targeting to the MVB is the result of an interaction between the late domain in p6(Gag) and the MVB sorting machinery (e.g., TSG101), we examined the targeting and assembly of Gag mutants lacking p6. Significantly, the MVB localization of Gag was still observed in the absence of p6, suggesting that an interaction between Gag and TSG101 is not required for Gag targeting to the MVB. These data are consistent with a model for Gag targeting that postulates two different cellular binding partners for Gag, one on the plasma membrane and the other in the MVB.14707480
Sensitive flow cytometric method to test basophil activation influenced by homeopathic histamine dilutions.
Lorenz I, Schneider E M, Stolz P, Brack A, Strube J
Forschende Komplementärmedizin und klassische Naturheilkunde = Research in complementary and natural classical medicine
In an experimental setting, human basophil degranulation was triggered by anti-IgE to measure the effects from homeopathic solutions in an in-vitro cell system. A 3-color flow cytometric method with enhanced accuracy was established. As an example we looked at the influence of histamine on anti-IgE activation of basophils.
Basophils were identified in the flow cytometer by their physical properties in the forward and side scatter light depiction and by gating on CD2(-), CD14(-), CD16(-), CD19(-), HLA-DR(-) negative and CD123-positive cells. CD63 expression on the cell surface of the anti-IgE-activated basophils served as an activation marker.
With this method we were able to study basophil function of the 0.6-3.9% basophils out of the mononuclear blood cell fraction and to document their activation status upon anti-IgE activation. Optimal activation occurs at 0.6 microg/ml final anti-IgE concentration; not less than 10,000 basophils have to be counted per batch to reduce the variation of the measurement. The fixation method was able to stabilize activation for two days. After investigation and reduction of the source of measurement variability, an unequivocally inhibited basophil activation was documented in a partly optimized system with homeopathic dilutions of histamine (10(-22)M, 10(-23)M, 10(-24)M, and 10(-25)M histamine). Dilutions greater than 10(-20)M histamine (Avogadro's number 6.02 x 10(23)) account for less than 1.36 molecules of histamine in the test sample, indicating a true homeopathic effect.
This test system is adequate for studying the effects of highly diluted mediators on basophil activation by anti-IgE. The systematic application of this experimental arrangement is recommended to study the effects of homeopathic dilutions on basophils.
Copyright 2003 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg14690496
How to roll an endothelial cigar: the biogenesis of Weibel-Palade bodies.
Michaux Grégoire, Cutler Daniel F
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Weibel-Palade bodies (WPB) are the regulated secretory organelles of endothelial cells. These cigar-shaped membrane-bound structures function in both hemostasis and inflammation but their biogenesis is poorly understood. Here, we review what is currently known about their formation. The content of WPBs is dominated by the hemostatic factor von Willebrand factor (VWF), whose complex biogenesis ends in the formation of high molecular weight multimers. VWF is also organized into proteinaceous tubules which underlie the striated interior of WPBs as seen in the EM. VWF expression is necessary for formation of WPBs, and its heterologous expression can even lead to the specific recruitment of WPB membrane proteins, including the leukocyte receptor P-selectin, the tetraspanin CD63, and Rab27a. Unusually, the VWF propeptide is implicated in the biogenesis of WPBs, being essential for formation of the storage compartment. The elongation of the cigars and the formation of the tubules are determined by non-covalent interactions between pro- and mature VWF proteins. Surprisingly, high molecular weight multimers seem neither necessary nor sufficient to trigger formation of a storage compartment, and do not seem to have any role in WPB biogenesis. Von Willebrand's disease, usually caused by mutations within VWF, has provided many of the insights into the way in which VWF drives the formation of these organelles.14679788
[Platelet activation marker].
Nomura Shosaku
Rinsho byori. The Japanese journal of clinical pathology
Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death in patients with diabetes mellitus, increasing mortality in all forms of the disease. Classical risk factors, including hyperlipidemia, hypertension and obesity, do not completely account for the increased incidence of atherosclerosis in diabetes. Some platelet activation markers such as CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, Annexin V and platelet-derived microparticles (PDMP) are elevated in patients with diabetes, since diabetic platelets often have increased sensitivity to secondary aggregation in response to agonist. PDMPs are thought to play a role in clinical disease because they express phospholipids that function as procoagulants. High shear stress can initiate both platelet aggregation and shedding of procoagulant-containing PDMP, suggesting that PDMP generation by high shear stress occurs in small diseased arteries and arterioles under various clinical conditions. Platelet activation markers were significantly higher in the hypertensive or hyperlipidemic patients than in the controls. Selectins and cell adhesion molecules were also higher in the hypertensive or hyperlipidemic patients, and they were significantly higher in these patients with diabetes. Activated microparticles and PDMP may contribute to the development of atherosclerosis in diabetes, and platelet activation markers seem to be useful for the assessment of vascular damage in these patients.14679016
Biological significance of aminopeptidase N/CD13 in thyroid carcinomas.
Kehlen Astrid, Lendeckel Uwe, Dralle Henning, Langner Jürgen, Hoang-Vu Cuong
Cancer research
Aminopeptidase N (APN)/CD13 is a transmembrane ectopeptidase expressed on a wide variety of cells. However, the precise function of APN/CD13 in tumor cells and the relationship of APN/CD13 to thyroid cancer remain unclear. In our study, we quantified the expression of APN/CD13 and additionally dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPIV)/CD26 in thyroid carcinoma cell lines and in tissues of patients with thyroid carcinomas. Undifferentiated anaplastic thyroid carcinomas expressed more APN/CD13 than differentiated thyroid carcinomas. DPIV/CD26 showed an opposite expression pattern. We detected higher levels of DPIV/CD26 in follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTCs) and papillary thyroid carcinomas than in undifferentiated anaplastic thyroid carcinomas. In the undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma cell line 1736, APN/CD13 mRNA expression could be increased by epidermal growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor alpha. FTC-133 cells stably transfected with an expression vector for APN-enhanced green fluorescent protein showed a higher migration rate than FTC-133 cells transfected with the enhanced green fluorescent protein-control plasmid. Overexpression of APN/CD13 in stably transfected cells is associated with down-regulation of N-myc down-regulated gene (NDRG)-1, melanoma-associated antigen ME491/CD63, and DPIV/CD26 gene expression. Inhibition of APN/CD13 mRNA expression by small interfering RNA induced NDRG-1, ME491/CD63, and DPIV/CD26 mRNA expression in cells of the undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma cell line C643. We conclude that APN/CD13-associated down-regulation of NDRG-1, ME491/CD63, and DPIV/CD26 in thyroid carcinoma cells is an important step of tumor progression to more malignant phenotypes, and we underline the important role of APN/CD13 as mediator in a multimolecular process regulating cell migration.14670287
Allergy to heparin: a new in vitro diagnostic technique.
Caballero M R, Fernández-Benítez M
Allergologia et immunopathologia
Few descriptions of allergic reactions to heparin have been published, because these reactions are not well known, their prevalence is low and they are difficult to diagnose due to the lack of an in vitro test until now. We propose a new technique, the basophil activation test (BAT) for the diagnosis of these reactions.
We performed in vivo and in vitro studies with heparin and its derivatives in two patients with heparin-induced acute urticaria. In both patients the results of prick tests with sodium and calcium heparin, enoxaparin and nadroparin with immediate reading were negative. Intradermal skin tests with immediate reading and reading at 48 and at 96 hours with calcium heparin, enoxaparin and nadroparin were positive in the immediate reading and after 48 hours in the first patient. The second patient showed positivity to nadroparin in the immediate reading. The same drugs were also tested using patch tests, with reading after 48 and 72 hours. The second patient showed positivity to nadroparin after 48 hours. The BAT was positive to enoxaparin in the first patient and revealed showed slight positivity to sodium heparin in the second patient.
We consider the BAT to be a useful, safe and reliable test for the in vitro diagnosis of heparin allergy. This test avoids the use of provocation tests, which present a risk to the patient.14660791
The tetraspanin CD63 enhances the internalization of the H,K-ATPase beta-subunit.
Duffield Amy, Kamsteeg Erik-Jan, Brown Andrea N, Pagel Philipp, Caplan Michael J
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
The tetraspanin CD63 resides in late endosomes, lysosomes, secretory vesicles, and at the plasma membrane, and it moves among these compartments. We find that CD63 is present also in tubulovesicular elements, the intracellular compartments that contain the H,K-ATPase in unstimulated gastric parietal cells. The H,K-ATPase beta-subunit and CD63 colocalize in parietal cells and form a complex that can be coprecipitated. The beta-subunit and CD63 also interact when they are coexpressed in COS-7 cells. Furthermore, expression with CD63 induces the redistribution of the beta-subunit from the cell surface to CD63+ intracellular compartments. Immunofluorescence and biochemical experiments reveal that this redistribution occurs by enhanced endocytosis of H,K-ATPase beta-subunit complexed with CD63. Coexpression of the beta-subunit with mutant CD63 polypeptides demonstrates that the enhanced internalization of the beta-subunit depends on the capacity of CD63 to interact with adaptor protein complexes 2 and 3. These data indicate that CD63 serves as an adaptor protein that links its interaction partners to the endocytic machinery of the cell and suggest a previously uncharacterized protein-trafficking role for the tetraspanins.14633253
Comparison of various dimethylsulphoxide-containing solutions for cryopreservation of leucoreduced platelet concentrates.
Dijkstra-Tiekstra M J, de Korte D, Pietersz R N I, Reesink H W, van der Meer P F, Verhoeven A J
Vox sanguinis
Leucoreduced platelet concentrates (LR-PCs) can be stored at 20-24 degrees C for 5-7 days. When LR-PCs are cryopreserved they can be stored for several years. For cryopreservation to become applicable in blood-bank practice, an off-the-shelf cryoprotectant is needed that can be added to the LR-PC in a sterile manner. For this, we varied the composition of the cryopreservation medium and studied various parameters of cryopreserved LR-PCs for up to 24 h after thawing at room temperature.
LR-PCs in plasma or Composol were concentrated and divided into 2 units. To each unit, an equal part of 10% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) in plasma, Composol with or without 5% albumin, or GPO (pasteurized plasma-protein solution) was added. Freezing occurred at 1 degrees C/min and LR-PCs were placed in the vapour phase of nitrogen. LR-PCs were thawed at 37 degrees C and stored at room temperature. LR-PCs were tested for morphology, platelet recovery, swirling effect, and activation antigens at various time-points thereafter.
LR-PCs in 100%, 65% and 50% plasma supplemented with Composol showed good morphology scores (>250), limited CD62P expression (<35%), low CD63 expression (<20%) and a swirling effect of about 2, at 24 h after thawing. At the same time-point, platelet recovery was >80% under all conditions and CD42b expression varied between 70 and 85%. Results of LR-PCs in 15% plasma and Composol, with or without plasma substitutes, were not acceptable at 24 h after thawing, i.e. the morphology score was <200 and the CD62P expression was >40%.
A minimum of 50% plasma in the cryopreserved LR-PC is necessary to maintain an acceptable in vitro quality of platelets up to 24 h after thawing. Composol is a good candidate for using to prepare an off-the-shelf cryoprotectant.14631085
Platelet function under aspirin, clopidogrel, and both after ischemic stroke: a case-crossover study.
Yamazaki Masako, Uchiyama Shinichiro
Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation
14627528
Platelet activation and the protective effect of aprotinin in hepatolithiasis patients.
Feng Wen-Ming, Bao Ying, Fei Mao-Yun, Chen Qiu-Qiang, Yang Qi, Dai Chuang
Hepatobiliary & pancreatic diseases international : HBPD INT
To explore platelet activation and the protective effect of aprotinin in patients with hepatolithiasis.
The count of platelets and levels of CD62P and CD63 were measured by flow cytometry in 38 patients with hepatolithiasis. Several measurements were carried out after treatment with aprotinin.
The levels of CD62P, CD63 in patients with hepatolithiasis were higher than those in patients with cholecystolithiasis (P<0.05), but the count of platelets was lower (P<0.05). After operation, the levels of CD62P, CD63 were significantly increased in patients with hepatolithiasis, but the count of platelets was lower (P<0.05). Postoperative levels of CD62P, CD63 were significantly lower in patients treated with aprotinin than in normal controls (P<0.05); but there was no significant change in the count of platelets in the two groups.
Platelet activation occurs in patients with hepatolithiasis, and may be inhibited by aprotinin.14602237
Exosomes bearing HLA-G are released by melanoma cells.
Riteau Béatrice, Faure Florence, Menier Catherine, Viel Sophie, Carosella Edgardo D, Amigorena Sèbastian, Rouas-Freiss Nathalie
Human immunology
Tumor cells release membrane vesicles, named exosomes, capable of specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activation by transferring tumor antigens to dendritic cells. By contrast, the nonclassical human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-G class I molecule displays immunotolerant properties and can be ectopically expressed by tumor cells, thereby allowing their escape from immunosurveillance. We describe here that a melanoma cell line, named Fon, established from an HLA-G-positive melanoma biopsy, spontaneously expressed high levels of the HLA-G1 membrane-bound isoform. Exosomes released by Fon cells were purified and analyzed both for their density on sucrose gradient and their protein composition by Western blotting and flow cytometry. Besides the expression of well-described proteins such as Lamp-2, notably, these melanoma-derived exosomes bore HLA-G1. In addition, exosomes harboring HLA-G1 were secreted by the HLA-G-negative M8 melanoma cells transfected with the HLA-G1 cDNA. Thus, the presence of tolerogenic HLA-G molecules on melanoma-derived exosomes may provide a novel way for tumors to modulate host's immune response.14582906
Exosomes with major histocompatibility complex class II and co-stimulatory molecules are present in human BAL fluid.
Admyre C, Grunewald J, Thyberg J, Gripenbäck S, Tornling G, Eklund A, Scheynius A, Gabrielsson S
The European respiratory journal : official journal of the European Society for Clinical Respiratory Physiology
Exosomes are 30-100 nm diameter vesicles formed by inward budding of endosomal compartments and are produced by several cell types, including T-cells, B-cells and dendritic cells (DC)s. Exosomes from DCs express major histocompatibility complexes (MHC) class I and II, and co-stimulatory molecules on their surface, and can induce antigen-specific activation of T-cells. The aims of the present study were to investigate for the presence of exosomes in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from healthy individuals, and to establish if these exosomes bear MHC and co-stimulatory molecules. The authors analysed BALF taken from seven healthy volunteers and used exosomes from monocyte-derived DC (MDDC) cultures as a reference. After ultracentrifugation, exosomes were bound to anti-MHC class II coated magnetic beads and analysed by flow cytometry and electron microscopy. The authors report for the first time that exosomes are present in BALF. These exosomes are similar to MDDC derived exosomes as they express MHC class I and II, CD54, CD63 and the co-stimulatory molecule CD86. The results demonstrate that exosomes are present in the lung, and since they contain both major histocompatibility complex and co-stimulatory molecules it is likely that they are derived from antigen presenting cells and might have a regulatory role in local immune defence.14582138
Antibodies against human cell receptors, CD36, CD41a, and CD62P crossreact with porcine platelets.
Delgado Angel V, Alexander Stefan L, McManus Albert T, Pusateri Anthony E
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
A limitation in platelet study has been the availability of platelet function-specific membrane receptor antibodies for use in the various animal species that are currently used in the study of hemostasis and other phenomena.
Platelets were isolated from human and porcine blood. Resting and activated platelets were incubated with antibodies against the human cell surface receptors CD36 (clone CB38), CD41a (clone HIP8), CD62P (clone AK4), and CD63 (clone H5C6). Antibody titration and ligand blocking studies also were performed.
Binding of anti-CD41a and anti-CD62P were similar for human and porcine platelets in percentage of platelets labeled and in number of receptors per cell. Binding of anti-CD36 was similar between species, with fewer receptors present in porcine cells. Anti-CD63 and anti-CD107a did not bind specifically to porcine platelets.
The anti-CD36, anti-CD41a, and anti-CD62P antibodies studied crossreact with porcine platelets and will be useful in the investigation of platelet function in porcine models.14580882
Sensitive and viable identification of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells by a flow cytometric assay for degranulation.
Betts Michael R, Brenchley Jason M, Price David A, De Rosa Stephen C, Douek Daniel C, Roederer Mario, Koup Richard A
Journal of immunological methods
Flow cytometric detection of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells has previously been limited to MHC-class I tetramer staining or intracellular cytokine production, neither of which measure the cytolytic potential of these cells. Here we present a novel technique to enumerate antigen-specific CD8+ T cells using a marker expressed on the cell surface following activation induced degranulation, a necessary precursor of cytolysis. This assay measures the exposure of CD107a and b, present in the membrane of cytotoxic granules, onto the cell surface as a result of degranulation. Acquisition of cell surface CD107a and b is associated with loss of intracellular perforin and is inhibited by colchicine, indicating that exposure of CD107a and b to the cell surface is dependent on degranulation. CD107a and b are expressed on the cell surface of CD8+ T cells following activation with cognate peptide, concordant with production of intracellular IFNgamma. Finally, CD107-expressing CD8+ T cells are shown to mediate cytolytic activity in an antigen-specific manner. Measurement of CD107a and b expression can also be combined with MHC-class I tetramer labeling and intracellular cytokine staining to provide a more complete assessment of the functionality of CD8+T cells expressing cognate T cell receptors (TCR).14568979
Human decidual natural killer cells are a unique NK cell subset with immunomodulatory potential.
Koopman Louise A, Kopcow Hernan D, Rybalov Basya, Boyson Jonathan E, Orange Jordan S, Schatz Frederick, Masch Rachel, Lockwood Charles J, Schachter Asher D, Park Peter J, Strominger Jack L
The Journal of experimental medicine
Natural killer cells constitute 50-90% of lymphocytes in human uterine decidua in early pregnancy. Here, CD56(bright) uterine decidual NK (dNK) cells were compared with the CD56(bright) and CD56(dim) peripheral NK cell subsets by microarray analysis, with verification of results by flow cytometry and RT-PCR. Among the approximately 10,000 genes studied, 278 genes showed at least a threefold change with P < or = 0.001 when comparing the dNK and peripheral NK cell subsets, most displaying increased expression in dNK cells. The largest number of these encoded surface proteins, including the unusual lectinlike receptors NKG2E and Ly-49L, several killer cell Ig-like receptors, the integrin subunits alpha(D), alpha(X), beta1, and beta5, and multiple tetraspanins (CD9, CD151, CD53, CD63, and TSPAN-5). Additionally, two secreted proteins, galectin-1 and progestagen-associated protein 14, known to have immunomodulatory functions, were selectively expressed in dNK cells.14566336
Adaptor protein 3-dependent microtubule-mediated movement of lytic granules to the immunological synapse.
Clark Richard H, Stinchcombe Jane C, Day Anna, Blott Emma, Booth Sarah, Bossi Giovanna, Hamblin Terry, Davies E Graham, Griffiths Gillian M
Nature immunology
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by platelet defects and oculocutaneous albinism. Individuals with HPS type 2 (HPS2) lack the cytosolic adaptor protein 3 (AP-3) involved in lysosomal sorting, and are also immunodeficient. Here we characterize an HPS2 mutation and demonstrate that AP-3 deficiency leads to a loss of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated cytotoxicity. Although the lysosomal protein CD63 was mislocalized to the plasma membrane, perforin and granzymes were correctly localized to the lytic granules in AP-3-deficient CTLs. However, the lytic granules of AP-3-deficient CTLs were enlarged and were unable to move along microtubules and dock within the secretory domain of the immunological synapse. These data show that AP-3 is essential for polarized secretion from CTLs.14564328
Effects of clopidogrel and aspirin combination versus aspirin alone on platelet aggregation and major receptor expression in patients with heart failure: the Plavix Use for Treatment Of Congestive Heart Failure (PLUTO-CHF) trial.
Serebruany Victor L, Malinin Alex I, Jerome Scott D, Lowry David R, Morgan Athol W, Sane David C, Tanguay Jean-François, Steinhubl Steven R, O'connor Christopher M
American heart journal
Persistent platelet activation may contribute to thrombotic events in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF). Chronic use of mild platelet inhibitors could therefore represent an independent avenue to improve morbidity, mortality, and quality of life in this expanding population. Although clopidogrel is widely used in patients with acute coronary syndromes and ischemic stroke, the ability of this novel ADP-receptor antagonist to inhibit platelet function in patients with CHF is unknown. We assessed antiplatelet properties of clopidogrel with aspirin (C+A) versus aspirin alone (A) in patients with CHF with heightened platelet activity.
Patients with left ventricular ejection fraction <40%, or CHF symptoms in the setting of preserved systolic function and New York Heart Association class II-IV were screened. Patients were considered to have platelet activation when 4 of the following 5 parameters were met: ADP-induced platelet aggregation >60%; collagen-induced aggregation >70%; whole blood aggregation >18 ohms; expression of GP IIb/IIIa >220 log MFI; and P-selectin cell positivity >8%. All patients were treated with 325 mg of acetylsalycilic acid (ASA) for at least 1 month. Patients receiving an antithrombotic agent other than ASA were excluded. Patients meeting clinical and laboratory criteria were randomly assigned to C+A (n=25), A (n=25) groups, or represent screen failures (n=38). Platelet studies (conventional and whole blood aggregometry, shear-induced activation, expression of 10 major receptors and formation of platelet-leukocyte microparticles) were performed at baseline and after 30 days of therapy.
There were no deaths, hospitalizations, or serious adverse events. There were no changes in platelet parameters in the A group. In contrast, therapy with C+A resulted in a significant inhibition of platelet activity assessed by ADP-induced (P =.00001), and epinephrine-induced (P =.0016) aggregation, closure time (P =.04), expression of PECAM-1 (P =.009), GP Ib (P =.006), GP IIb/IIIa antigen (P =.0001), GP IIb/IIIa activity with PAC-1 (P =.0021), and CD151 (P =.0026) when compared with the A group. Therapy with C+A also resulted in the reduced formation of platelet-leukocyte microparticles (P =.021). Collagen-induced aggregation in plasma and in whole blood, expression of vitronectin receptor, P-selectin, CD63, CD107a, and CD107b did not differ among groups.
Treatment with C+A for 1 month provides significantly greater inhibition of platelet activity than ASA alone in patients with CHF. Patients with CHF with heightened platelet activity represent a potential target population in which addition of clopidogrel may decrease mortality rates by reducing the incidence of thrombotic vascular events.14561735
Evidence that HIV budding in primary macrophages occurs through the exosome release pathway.
Nguyen Deborah Greene, Booth Amy, Gould Stephen J, Hildreth James E K
The Journal of biological chemistry
Lipid rafts are specialized regions of cell membranes enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids that are involved in immune activation and signaling. Studies in T-cells indicate that these membrane domains serve as sites for release of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). By budding through lipid rafts in T-cells, HIV selectively incorporates raft markers and excludes non-raft proteins. This process has been well studied in T-cells, but it is unknown whether lipid rafts serve as budding sites for HIV in macrophages. Recently, we proposed a new model of retroviral biogenesis called the Trojan exosome hypothesis (Gould, S. J., Booth, A., and Hildreth, J. E. K. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 10592-10597). This model proposes that retroviruses coopt the existing cellular machinery for exosomal release. Here, we performed the first test designed to differentiate between the lipid raft hypothesis of retroviral biogenesis and the Trojan exosome hypothesis. Using macrophages, we examined the relative abundance of several host proteins on the cell surface, in lipid rafts, and on both HIV particles and exosomes derived from these cells. Our results show significant differences in the abundance of host proteins on the cell surface and in HIV. Moreover, our data demonstrate discordance in the abundance of some proteins in lipid rafts and in HIV. Finally, our data reveal a strong concordance between the host cell protein profile of exosomes and that of HIV. These results strongly support the Trojan exosome hypothesis and its prediction that retroviral budding represents exploitation of a pre-existing cellular pathway of intercellular vesicle trafficking.14559705
[Detection of platelet activation by flow cytometry in patients with pre-eclampsia].
Yi Zheng-Shan, Zhou Shu-Yun, Meng Fan-Yi, Feng Ru, Liu Qi-Fa, Lin Rong
Di 1 jun yi da xue xue bao = Academic journal of the first medical college of PLA
To explore the clinical significance of expression alterations of static and activated platelet glycoprotein CD41a, CD62p, and CD63 in patients with pre-eclampsia.
We used non-washing immunolabeling technique for fluorescence labeling of the static and activated platelet with CD41a, CD62p, and CD63 monoclonal antibodies of the blood samples from 16 patients with pre-eclampsia, 15 women with normal pregnancies and 20 healthy subjects. The expression of the monoclonal antibody was detected by flow cytometry.
The average static and activated platelet glycoprotein CD41a, CD62p, and CD63 expression levels in patients with pre-eclampsia were apparently higher than those of the normal pregnant women (P<0.01), while the comparison between the latter and the control group did not reveal any significant differences (P>0.05).
High levels of platelet glycoprotein CD62p and CD63 expressions are present in patients with preeclampsia, suggesting the presence of platelet activation in these patients.14522017
Targeting proteins to secretory lysosomes of natural killer cells as a principle for immunoregulation.
Hansson Markus, Jönsson Sofia, Persson Ann-Maj, Calafat Jero, Tapper Hans, Olsson Inge
Molecular immunology
Secretory lysosomes of natural killer (NK) cells combine storage, regulated secretion and lysosomal activity. We asked whether one could target exogenous proteins to the secretory lysosomes of NK-cells for final delivery into a tumor site upon degranulation. cDNAs for both soluble and transmembrane (tm) proteins were expressed in the human YT-Indy NK-cell line. Targeting of a soluble TNF receptor (sTNFR1) was achieved by expressing a cDNA construct with a transmembrane sequence to facilitate ER-export and by incorporating a cytosolic sorting signal (Y) from CD63 to overcome constitutive secretion. The resulting sTNFR1-tm-Y was targeted to secretory lysosomes as confirmed by results from biosynthetic radiolabeling in combination with subcellular fractionation, immunoelectron microscopy, and immunofluorescence microscopy. A soluble sTNFR1 form was generated in the secretory lysosome by endogenous proteolytic activity. Expression of exogenous normally secretory non-membrane proteins, such as alpha1-microglobulin (alpha1-m) and alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1-at) resulted mostly in constitutive secretion although a small amount of alpha1-microglobulin was targeted to secretory lysosomes. Our results suggest a potential for delivery of pharmacologically active agents into tumor sites by use of the NK-cell secretory lysosome as a carrier.14521319
Assessment of in vitro platelet activation by Advia 120 platelet parameters.
Giacomini A, Legovini P, Antico F, Valverde S, Salvadego M M, Manoni F, Gessoni G
Laboratory hematology : official publication of the International Society for Laboratory Hematology
The Advia 120 Hematology System provides new platelet parameters that have been proposed as useful markers of platelet activation. The aim of this study was to investigate platelet parameter variations after adenosine diphosphate (ADP) activation of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) in vitro, with particular interest in the mean platelet component (MPC), which was compared with two well-known degranulation antigens. Changes in platelet parameters that were induced by the activation of PRP with different concentrations of ADP were examined first. The time course of parameter values up to 60 minutes after maximal ADP activation and the relationships between the MPC and P-selectin and granulophysin expression as determined by flow cytometry were then investigated. After 10 minutes of ADP stimulation, the MPC presented a dose-dependent increase. At the maximal ADP concentration, the initial increase of the MPC was followed by a progressive decrease, leading the MPC to become significantly lower with respect to the baseline after 60 minutes of incubation. Significant variations in other parameters are also described. Finally, a negative correlation was found between the MPC change with respect to time 0 and both P-selectin and granulophysin expression. The present study suggests that platelet parameter variation, particular in the MPC, may be used to assess platelet activation in PRPs stimulated by ADP.14515997
Nitridergic platelet pathway activation by hementerin, a metalloprotease from the leech Haementeria depressa.
Chudzinski-Tavassi Ana M, Bermej Emilse, Rosenstein Ruth E, Faria Fernanda, Sarmiento María I Keller, Alberto Fabiana, Sampaio Misako U, Lazzari María A
Biological chemistry
Hementerin (HT) is an 80 kDa fibrino(geno)lytic metalloprotease, purified from saliva of the leech Haementeria depressa. In the present report, the effect of HT on several functional parameters of human platelets was assessed. HT inhibited platelet aggregation and ATP release induced by different agonists such as ADP, adrenaline, collagen, thrombin, and arachidonic acid. HT did neither modify the expression of platelet glycoproteins (Ib, IIb-IIIa, Ia-IIa, IV) nor intraplatelet fibrinogen levels, whereas it markedly decreased CD62P and CD63 levels after the stimulation with thrombin. HT significantly increased thrombin-induced platelet Ca2+ intracellular levels, cGMP content and nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity. The effect of HT on platelet aggregation was reversed by two NOS inhibitors, N(omega)-Nitro-L-arginine methyl ester and 2 N(G)-Nitro-L-arginine. In summary, these results indicate that HT is an effective inhibitor of human platelet aggregation, presumably through activation of the platelet's nitridergic pathway.14510955
Molecular, ultrastructural and functional characterization of a Spanish family with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome: role of insC974 in platelet function and clinical relevance.
González-Conejero Rocio, Rivera José, Escolar Ginés, Zuazu-Jausoro Isabel, Vicente Vicente, Corral Javier
British journal of haematology
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, which is genetically heterogeneous. In humans, mutations associated with this syndrome have been identified that affect four genes, most of them located in the HPS-1 gene. We evaluated the clinical, molecular, platelet ultrastructure and platelet function data obtained from one Spanish HPS patient and his relatives. The proband was compound heterozygous for a de novo nonsense mutation (Arg-131Stop), which has not been described previously, and for a common frameshift mutation (insC974). These two mutations were also identified by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in half the RNA, supporting the premise that they have minor effects on either transcription or RNA stability. The patient had an almost complete absence of platelet-dense granules. Accordingly, his platelets showed a small aggregatory response, reduced CD63 surface expression after platelet activation and minor serotonin uptake. Interestingly, despite the absence of clinical symptoms, two relatives carrying only one HPS-1 mutation (insC974) presented a decreased content of platelet-dense granules and showed significant reductions in platelet aggregation, expression of CD63 after platelet activation and serotonin uptake. Data show that the presence of a single mutation affecting one allele of the HPS-1 gene might have relevance in the organogenesis of platelet-dense granules, affecting platelet function. However, these functional defects were not of a great enough magnitude to have clinical significance and, thus, these subjects were clinically asymptomatic.14508073
A decrease in the expression of CD63 tetraspanin protein elevates invasive potential of human melanoma cells.
Jang Hwa-In, Lee Hansoo
Experimental & molecular medicine
CD63, which belongs to the tetraspanin membrane proteins, has been proposed to play an important role in inhibiting melanoma metastasis. To determine whether reduction of CD63 expression, which frequently occurs in the malignant progression of human melanoma, is responsible for metastasis promotion, we transfected the antisense CD63 cDNA into MelJuso melanoma cells having endogenous CD63 expression. The antisense CD63 transfectant clones showing decreased CD63 expression displayed increased cell motility, matrix- degrading activity, and invasiveness in vitro when compared with the control transfectant cells. The antisense CD63 cDNA-transfected cells also exhibited altered adhesiveness to extracellular matrix. The results suggest that reduced CD63 expression contributes to the invasive and metastatic ability of human melanoma cells.14500369
Beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides and coarse vesicles: a common, pervasive phenotype in melanoma and other human cancers.
Handerson Tamara, Pawelek John M
Cancer research
We describe a new phenotype of wide occurrence in human cancer: expression of coarse vesicles rich in beta1,6-branched oligosaccharides. beta1,6-branching, catalyzed by GNT-V, is associated with metastasis and predicts poor survival in primary human breast and colon carcinomas. Yet little is known on the histopathology of this phenomenon. We studied beta1,6-branching [determined by leukocytic phytohemagglutinin (LPHA) lectin-histochemistry] in 119 archival specimens of human melanomas and other neoplasms, including carcinomas of the lung, colon, breast, ovary, prostate, kidney, and Hodgkin's lymphoma. At least portions of most tumors (96%) stained to some extent with LPHA. Staining was always, but not exclusively, associated with coarse vesicles. In melanomas, LPHA staining colocalized with CD63 and gp100. In pigmented melanomas, the vesicles were melanized and are known as "coarse melanin." LPHA-positive, coarse melanin was a feature of both tumor cells and melanophages and accounted for the well-known hypermelanotic regions of primary melanomas. LPHA-positive tumor cells varied widely in primaries (melanoma and others), ranging from 0 to 100% for a given tumor, whereas metastases were far more homogeneous (P = 0.0080), with vesicular, LPHA-positive tumor cells comprising >75% of 15 of 16 metastatic melanomas and renal cell carcinomas. In studies by others, GNT-V elicited formation of autophagy-dependent, LPHA-positive vesicles in mink lung alveolar cells (Hariri et al., Mol. Biol. Cell, 11: 255-268, 2000), suggesting that the coarse vesicles in tumors reported here may have been induced by GNT-V. Expression of the phenotype was so common and pervasive that it appeared to be an integral component of the biology of tumor progression. The origin of this phenotype and its biological significance are as yet unclear and will require considerable further study.13130179
Serial measurement of surface expressions of CD63, P-selectin and CD40 ligand on platelets in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke. A possible role of CD40 ligand on platelets in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke.
Cha Jae-Kwan, Jeong Min-Ho, Jang Ji-Yeon, Bae Hae-Rahn, Lim Yeong-Jin, Kim Jung Sun, Kim Sang-Ho, Kim Jae Woo
Cerebrovascular diseases (Basel, Switzerland)
Platelet activation is a key step in the progression of atherosclerosis. The CD40 ligand (CD40L) on platelets may be a critical factor to develop the acute vascular events from atheroma.
To determine the role of CD40L on platelets in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke, we serially measured the expressions of CD63, P-selectin and CD40L on platelets in patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke (n = 25) and compared them with those in patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis (n = 20) and in normal subjects (n = 24).
The expressions of CD63 and P-selectin on platelets were significantly higher in patients with atherosclerotic ischemic stroke (n = 25) than in normal subjects (n = 24). The extents of surface expressions of CD63 and P-selectin on platelets showed no significant differences between atherosclerotic ischemic stroke and asymptomatic carotid stenosis. However, the CD40L expression on platelets was significantly higher in atherosclerotic ischemic stroke when compared to that in asymptomatic carotid stenosis.
In our data, among the population with large artery atherosclerosis, the patients with symptomatic ischemic events showed a significantly elevated expression of CD40L on platelets compared to those without ischemic events. Therefore, the upregulation of CD40L on platelets may be a specific marker of platelet activation to provoke ischemic stroke from large artery atherosclerosis.
Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel12974720
Characterisation of the biosynthesis and processing of the neutrophil granule membrane protein CD63 in myeloid cells.
Ageberg M, Lindmark A
Clinical and laboratory haematology
The biosynthesis and processing of the neutrophil granule membrane protein CD63, present in azurophil granules, was investigated in four myeloid cell lines. The amount of CD63 synthesised differed, so did the amount of protein processed to high molecular weight forms, with the demonstration of a more prominent synthesis of CD63 in K562 cells. Newly synthesised CD63 was initially detected as two precursor forms with molecular weight of 32 and 35 kDa, respectively. These two initial forms were processed further to yield high molecular weight forms of CD63 with a mean molecular weight of 50 kDa. Treatment with endoglycosidase H or N-glycosidase F revealed a protein core, free from asparagine-linked carbohydrates, with a molecular weight of 23 kDa. Newly synthesised CD63 was susceptible to digestion with endoglycosidase H, and the protein was not completely resistant to endoglycosidase H until after 4 h of chase, indicating that transport through the medial and trans-Golgi complex with conversion of high-mannose carbohydrates to complex oligosaccharide side chains had occurred. This finding indicates a relatively long processing time for CD63 compared to that of soluble azurophil granule proteins. By digestion with O-glycanase, the existence of O-linked oligosaccharides on CD63 could not be demonstrated. Biosynthetic labelling of cells in the presence of brefeldin A showed the importance of a functional Golgi apparatus for processing of the protein to its high molecular weight forms.12970508
In vivo platelet activation in ischemic stroke patients.
Karakantza Marina, Maniatis Alice, Metallinos C Ioannis, Papapetropoulos Thodoros, Paschalis Christos
Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation
12963735
Induction of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase reduces early endosome autoantigen 1 (EEA1) recruitment to phagosomal membranes.
Fratti Rutilio A, Chua Jennifer, Deretic Vojo
The Journal of biological chemistry
Mycobacterium tuberculosis survives in the infected host by parasitizing macrophages in which the bacillus resides in a specialized phagosome sequestered from the phagolysosomal degradative pathway. Here we report a role of the stress-induced p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) in the component of M. tuberculosis phagosome maturation arrest that has been linked previously to the reduced recruitment of the endosomal and phagosomal membrane-tethering molecule called early endosome autoantigen 1 (EEA1; Fratti, R. A., Backer, J. M., Gruenberg, J., Corvera, S., and Deretic, V. (2001) J. Cell Biol. 154, 631-644). A pharmacological inhibition of M. tuberculosis var. bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin-induced p38 MAPK activity caused a marked increase in EEA1 colocalization with mycobacterial phagosomes. Consistent with the increase in EEA1 association and its role in phagosomal maturation, the pharmacological block of p38 activity caused phagosomal acidification and enrichment of the late endocytic markers lysobisphosphatidic acid and CD63 (lysosomal integral membrane protein 1) on mycobacterial phagosomes. A negative regulatory role of p38 MAPK activation in phagosome maturation was further demonstrated by converse experiments with latex bead phagosomes. Artificial activation of p38 MAPK caused a decrease in EEA1 colocalization with model latex bead phagosomes, which normally acquire EEA1 and subsequently mature into the phagolysosome. These findings show that p38 MAPK activity contributes to the arrest of M. tuberculosis phagosome maturation and demonstrate a negative regulatory role of p38 in phagolysosome biogenesis.12960315
Recombinant CD63/ME491/neuroglandular/NKI/C-3 antigen inhibits growth of established tumors in transgenic mice.
Li Jian, Li Weiping, Liang Shaohong, Cai Dewei, Kieny Marie Paule, Jacob Lutz, Linnenbach Alban, Abramczuk Jan W, Bender Hans, Sproesser Katrin, Swoboda Rolf, Somasundaram Rajasekharan, Guerry DuPont, Herlyn Dorothee
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
Attempts to vaccinate against tumors can be hindered by the induction of immunological tolerance to the target Ag as a result of Ag expression on normal tissues. In this study, we find that transgenic mice expressing the melanoma-associated Ag CD63/ME491/neuroglandular/NKI/C-3 on their normal tissues do, in fact, exhibit immunological tolerance to the Ag, recapitulating the conditions in cancer patients. In these mice, growth of murine melanoma cells expressing the Ag after gene transfer was inhibited by immunization with Ag-expressing recombinant vaccinia virus combined with IL-2, but not by immunization with the protein alone, anti-idiotypic Abs, or irradiated tumor cells. The effect of the recombinant virus was demonstrated both for nonestablished and established tumors. Infiltration with both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes was significantly more extensive in tumors from experimental mice than in tumors from control mice. MHC class I-positive, but not class I-negative, tumors were inhibited by the vaccine, suggesting that MHC class I-restricted T lymphocytes play a role in the antitumor effects. Abs did not appear to be involved in the vaccine effects. CD63 was immunogenic in 2 of 13 melanoma patients, pointing to the potential of this Ag, combined with IL-2, as a vaccine for melanoma patients.12941522
Over-expression of wild-type and mutant HFE in a human melanocytic cell line reveals an intracellular bridge between MHC class I pathway and transferrin iron uptake.
Fergelot Patricia, Orhant Magali, Thénié Agnès, Loyer Pascal, Ropert-Bouchet Martine, Lohyer Stéphanie, Le Gall Jean-Yves, Mosser Jean
Biology of the cell / under the auspices of the European Cell Biology Organization
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a frequent recessive disorder of iron metabolism characterised by systemic iron overload. In Northern Europe, more than 90% of HH patients are homozygous for a mis-sense mutation (C282Y) in the HFE1 gene product. The HFE protein is the heavy chain of a MHC class I-related molecule and associates with beta2 microglobulin and the transferrin receptor. Its precise roles in iron metabolism and in the pathophysiology of HH are still unclear. In order to identify the cellular processing of HFE, an important step towards the understanding of the function of the protein, we stably over-expressed the wild type and mutated forms fused to the Green Fluorescent Protein in a melanocytic MHC class I expressing cell line, the Mel Juso cell line. In wild type and mutant clones, the fusion proteins were not detected at the cell surface but only in the cytoplasm. Their sub-cellular localisation was determined by co-labelling of cells with organite-specific antibodies and confocal microscopy. HFE-GFP followed initially HLA class I intracellular processing but co-localised with transferrin in early endosomes without recycling at the cell surface. The C282Y-GFP fusion protein followed a different folding pathway to exit endoplasmic reticulum. Over-expression of the wild-type protein lead to a decrease in diferric transferrin uptake. Our model will be of use in the elucidation of the functional interaction between intracellular HFE and iron transporters transferrin/transferrin receptor complexes and Slc11A2 (also named N-Ramp2 or DMT1) in different endosomal compartments.12921813
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors yield additional antiplatelet protection in patients with congestive heart failure treated with antecedent aspirin.
Serebruany V L, Glassman A H, Malinin A I, Atar D, Sane D C, Oshrine B R, Ferguson J J, O'Connor C M
European journal of heart failure
Clinical depression has been identified as an independent risk factor for increased mortality in patients with coronary artery disease. Enhanced platelet activity has been suggested as the mechanism responsible for this adverse association. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are known to inhibit platelets in patients undergoing coronary stenting. We sought to determine whether concomitant therapy with SSRIs would yield additional anti-platelet benefit in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) already treated with antecedent aspirin. A total of 88 patients with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <40% or CHF symptoms in the setting of preserved systolic function and NYHA Class II-IV were analyzed. Of these, 23 patients (26%) were chronic SSRI users (SSRI+), and 65 patients were free from SSRI therapy (SSRI-). All patients received aspirin (325 mg) for at least 1 month prior to platelet studies. Platelets were assessed by aggregometry, flow cytometry and a rapid analyzer. The SSRI+ group exhibited a substantial decrease in platelet activity when compared with SSRI- patients, as manifested by a significant reduction in ADP- (P=0.001), and collagen-induced (P=0.02) aggregation, and the expression of PECAM-1 (P=0.03), GPIb (P=0.03), GP IIb/IIIa antigen (P=0.02) and GP IIb/IIIa activity with PAC-1 antibody (P=0.04) and P-selectin (P=0.02). Therapy with SSRIs also resulted in the reduced formation of platelet-leukocyte microparticles (P=0.01). Epinephrine-induced aggregation in plasma, collagen-induced whole blood aggregation, closure time and expression of vitronectin receptor, CD63, CD107a, CD107b and CD151 did not differ between groups. In patients with CHF already on aspirin, SSRI therapy was associated with further inhibition of platelet function. This observation may help to explain some of the clinical benefits associated with SSRI therapy. Further clinical trials may help to elucidate the potential outcome benefits of SSRIs in other potential thrombotic circumstances.12911790
Increased expression of surface activation markers on neutrophils following migration into the nasal lumen.
Kinhult J, Egesten A, Benson M, Uddman R, Cardell L O
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
The sequence of events following the recruitment of a free-flowing neutrophil in the peripheral circulation, via adhesion, migration and release of mediators, to a neutrophil on the surface of the nasal epithelium is a co-ordinated process. Little is known about the state of neutrophil activation following this course of events.
To investigate the expression of surface activation markers on neutrophils, reflecting activation during their recruitment to the nose, and to see whether the inflammatory process during allergic rhinitis influences this process.
Nine healthy controls and 12 patients with grass pollen-induced intermittent allergic rhinitis were investigated during the peak of the pollen season. The expression of CD11b, CD66b and CD63 on the neutrophil cell surface, as a reflection of activation, was analysed using flow cytometry. Neutrophils were derived from peripheral blood and nasal lavage fluid. In addition, eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) as well as L-, P- and E-selectins in the nasal lavage fluid were analysed using RIA and ELISA, respectively.
A marked increase in the expression of all three CD markers on the neutrophil cell surface was noticed following migration from the bloodstream to the surface of the nasal mucosa. At the peak of the grass pollen season, the MPO levels increased, reflecting an increase in the total number of nasal fluid neutrophils. In parallel, the expression of CD11b was further augmented. The expression of the CDb11b was reduced on neutrophils remaining in the circulation. In addition, the level of L-selectin was reduced on neutrophils derived from the blood during allergic inflammation.
Neutrophils might become activated during their transfer from the blood to the surface of the nasal mucosa, but these changes may also be due to depletion of activated neutrophils in the blood via activated endothelial/epithelial adhesion and chemoattractant measures. The increased expression of surface activation markers during allergic rhinitis suggests roles for neutrophils in the inflammatory process.12895324
[Effect of radiofrequency ablation on endothelial function and platelet activation].
Jin Zheng-ming, Chen Yao, Zheng Liang-rong, Tao Qian-ming, Hu Shen-jiang
Zhonghua nei ke za zhi [Chinese journal of internal medicine]
To investigate the effect of radiofrequency catheter ablation on endothelial function and platelet activation.
With radioimmunoassay, enzyme linked immunosorbent assay, cell labeling with monoclonal antibody and flow cytometry technique, thirty-one consecutive patients were checked for levels of plasma endothelin (ET), von willebrand's factor (vWF) and expression of platelet alpha-granule membrane glucoprotein (CD(62P)), platelet lysosome membrane glucoprotein (CD(63)) before, immediately and 47 - 115 hours after radiofrequency catheter ablation.
There was no significant difference in the levels of plasma ET and vWF before and after catheter ablation; The rate of CD(62P) and CD(63) expression rate on platelets was (4.75 +/- 2.32)% and (9.62 +/- 4.08)% before catheter ablation, and it significantly increased to (7.64 +/- 5.25)% (t = 3.05, P < 0.01) and (12.23 +/- 5.70)% (t = 2.10, P < 0.05) immediately after catheter ablation and then returned to baseline levels 47 - 115 hours after catheter ablation. There was a positive correlation between the change of CD(62P) expression and total energy dose of radiofrequency (r = 0.30, P < 0.05).
Radiofrequency catheter ablation did not bring about significant damage to endothelium but can increase expression of platelet membrane CD(62P), CD(63) and promote platelet activation, total energy dose of radiofrequency is one of important influencing factor.12890343
[Detection of platelet Ca2+(i), CD62P, CD63 and plasma CD62P in cirrhosis patients].
Tang Zhong, Zhuo Jing-guo, Huang Wen-fang, Yang Ming-qing
Zhonghua gan zang bing za zhi = Zhonghua ganzangbing zazhi = Chinese journal of hepatology
To study on the relationship between platelet Ca2+(i), CD62P, CD63, serum CD62P (SCD62P) and cirrhosis patients.
Platelet CD62P, CD63 were determined with flow cytometry, SCD63P with ELISA, and Ca2+(i) in platelet was determined with fluorophotometry.
Platelet Ca2+(i), CD62P, CD63, and SCD62P levels in cirrhosis patients were (103.1+/-22.2)nmol/L, (47.6+/-20.0)%, (47.1+/-24.6)%, and (67.6+/-37.6)microg/L, and in controls were (57.6+/-13.1)nmol/L, (3.1+/-0.7)%, (2.5+/-0.7)%, and (24.0+/-6.5)microg/L, respectively. The levels in the former were higher than those in the latter (t > or = 6.148, P<0.05). The above levels in upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage group were much higher than those in the non-haemorrhage group (120.3nmol/L+/-18.8nmol/L vs 91.1nmol/L+/-14.3nmol/L, 64.9%+/-14.7% vs 34.6%+/- 11.9%, 70.9%+/-14.5% vs 30.2%+/-14.4%, and 103.6microg/L+/-14.9microg/L vs 40.8microg/L+/-24.0microg/L, respectively, t > or = 5.380, P<0.05). But the numbers of platelet between the two groups were no obvious difference.
Platelet in the cirrhosis patients is greatly active, and the detection of platelet CD62P, CD63, SCD62P has a certain value in judging the degree of cirrhosis.12885763
Infectious HIV-1 assembles in late endosomes in primary macrophages.
Pelchen-Matthews Annegret, Kramer Beatrice, Marsh Mark
The Journal of cell biology
Although human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is generally thought to assemble at the plasma membrane of infected cells, virions have been observed in intracellular compartments in macrophages. Here, we investigated virus assembly in HIV-1-infected primary human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM). Electron microscopy of cryosections showed virus particles, identified by their morphology and positive labeling with antibodies to the viral p17, p24, and envelope proteins, in intracellular vacuoles. Immunolabeling demonstrated that these compartments contained the late endosomal marker CD63, which was enriched on vesicles within these structures and incorporated into the envelope of budding virions. The virus-containing vacuoles were also labeled with antibodies against LAMP-1, CD81, and CD82, which were also incorporated into the viral envelope. To assess the cellular source of infectious viruses derived from MDM, virus-containing media from infected cells were precipitated with specific antibodies. Only antibodies against antigens found in late endosomes precipitated infectious virus, whereas antibodies against proteins located primarily on the cell surface did not. Our data indicate that most of the infectious HIV produced by primary macrophages is assembled on late endocytic membranes and acquires antigens characteristic of this compartment. This notion has significant implications for understanding the biology of HIV and its cell-cell transmission.12883998
STRO-1, HOP-26 (CD63), CD49a and SB-10 (CD166) as markers of primitive human marrow stromal cells and their more differentiated progeny: a comparative investigation in vitro.
Stewart Karina, Monk Peter, Walsh Susan, Jefferiss Carolyn M, Letchford Julie, Beresford Jon N
Cell and tissue research
There is widespread interest in the use of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC) for tissue reconstruction and repair and for gene therapy. BMSC represent the differentiated progeny of CFU-F, which however comprise a developmentally heterogeneous population as is reflected in the cellular heterogeneity of the cell populations to which they give rise. We have compared the efficacy of monoclonal antibodies recognising a series of stromal antigens, viz. STRO-1, HOP-26, CD49a and SB-10/CD166, as tools for the enrichment of CFU-F prior to culture and as developmental markers for culture-expanded BMSC. In freshly isolated bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMNC), the proportion of antigen-positive cells was 27%, 46%, 5% and 19% for STRO-1, HOP-26, CD49a and CD166, respectively. All CD49a(+) cells co-expressed STRO-1. The degree of CFU-F enrichment obtained with anti-CD49a (approximately 18-fold) by a one-pass immunoselection strategy was significantly greater than that of all other antibodies tested. BMSC expressed higher levels of all antigens investigated (except for HOP-26) compared with BMMNC. Expression of STRO-1 and CD49a remained restricted to a subset of BMSC, whereas all BMSC were SB-10/CD166 positive. Treatment with dexamethasone (10 nM), which promotes the differentiation and further maturation of cells of the osteogenic lineage in this cell culture system, increased the expression of CD49a and HOP-26. The CD49a(+) and HOP-26(+) fractions of BMSC were further subdivided by dual-labelling with anti-STRO-1 and B4-78 (an antibody recognising the B/L/K isoform of the enzyme alkaline phosphatase), respectively. By using a variety of criteria, the HOP-26 antigen was identified as CD63, a member of the tetraspanin family of proteins thought to modulate integrin compartmentalisation and signalling.12871509
von Willebrand factor (VWF)-dependent human platelet activation: porcine VWF utilizes different transmembrane signaling pathways than does thrombin to activate platelets, but both require protein phosphatase function.
Song S, Mody M, Freedman J, Ellis J, Lazarus A H
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
The interaction between von Willebrand factor (VWF) and glycoprotein (GP) Ib results in platelet agglutination and activation of many signaling intermediates. To determine if VWF-dependent platelet activation requires the participation of pivotal transmembrane signaling pathways, we analyzed VWF-dependent platelet activation profiles following inhibition of several transmembrane signaling intermediates. This was accomplished using porcine VWF, which has been shown to interact with human GPIb independently of shear stress or ristocetin. Platelet alpha (CD62) and lysozomal granule release (CD63), microparticle formation, and platelet agglutination/aggregation were evaluated. The ability of signaling inhibitors to prevent VWF-dependent platelet activation was compared to their ability to inhibit thrombin-dependent activation. The results demonstrate that VWF-dependent platelet activation can occur independently of the activities of protein kinase C (PKC), wortmannin-sensitive phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase, and phospholipase C, as well as independently of elevations in the concentration of intracellular calcium. In sharp contrast, these transmembrane signaling intermediates are required for thrombin-dependent platelet activation. In addition, thrombin-dependent but not VWF-dependent platelet activation was associated with elevations in the concentration of intracellular calcium under the conditions used. The family of signaling intermediates which appeared to be pivotal for both thrombin- and VWF-dependent platelet activation were the protein tyrosine phosphatases and the serine/threonine phosphatases. It is concluded that thrombin-dependent platelet activation relies on the activation of several transmembrane signaling pathways, whereas VWF-dependent platelet activation is dependent upon the activity of protein phosphatases. Inhibition of these phosphatases in vivo may provide a novel therapeutic approach for treating VWF-dependent platelet disorders such as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura or arterial thrombosis.12871315
Concentration of rafts in platelet filopodia correlates with recruitment of c-Src and CD63 to these domains.
Heijnen H F G, Van Lier M, Waaijenborg S, Ohno-Iwashita Y, Waheed A A, Inomata M, Gorter G, Möbius W, Akkerman J W N, Slot J W
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
The molecular mechanism that causes non-adhesive, discoid platelets to transform into sticky dendritic bodies that form blood clumps is a complex series of events. Recently it has become clear that lipid microdomains--also known as rafts--play a crucial role in this process. We have used a non-cytolytic derivative of perfringolysin-O, a cholesterol binding cytolysin, that binds selectively to cholesterol-rich membrane domains, combined with confocal- and immunoelectron microscopy to visualize cholesterol-raft dynamics during platelet adhesion. In resting platelets cholesterol was uniformly distributed on the cell surface and confined to distinct intracellular compartments (i.e. multivesicular bodies, dense granules, and the internal membranes of alpha-granules). Upon interaction with fibrinogen, cholesterol accumulated at the tips of filopodia and at the leading edge of spreading cells. Stimulation with thrombin receptor activating peptide (TRAP) resulted in a similar redistribution of cholesterol towards filopodia. The adhesion-dependent raft aggregation was accompanied by concentration of the tyrosine kinase c-Src and the tetraspanin CD63 in these domains, whereas glycoprotein Ib (GPIb) was not selectively targeted to the raft clusters. c-Src, the tetraspanin CD63, and GPIb were recovered in biochemically isolated low-density membrane fractions. Disruption of rafts by depleting membrane cholesterol had no effect on platelet shape change but inhibited platelet spreading on fibrinogen and TRAP-induced aggregation. Our results demonstrate that cholesterol rafts in platelets are dynamic entities in the membrane that co-cluster with the tyrosine kinase c-Src and the costimulatory molecule CD63 in specialized domains at the cell surface, thereby providing a possible mechanism in functioning as signaling centres.12869646
Thalidomide down-regulates transcript levels of GC-rich promoter genes in multiple myeloma.
Drucker Liat, Uziel Orit, Tohami Tali, Shapiro Hava, Radnay Judith, Yarkoni Shai, Lahav Meir, Lishner Michael
Molecular pharmacology
Thalidomide (Thd), a potent teratogen, was shown to have therapeutic potential in cancer, primarily in multiple myeloma (MM), yet its mechanism of action has not been elucidated. It was recently suggested that its teratogenicity is derived from interference in expression of genes regulated by GC-rich promoters by blocking the binding of SP1 transcription factor to its motif. We explored the validation of the proposed model by focusing on potential molecular targets associated with MM pathogenesis. Cell lines RPMI 8226, U266, and ARH-77 were exposed for 24 h to racemic Thd and analyzed for apoptosis, membranal expression of CD29 and CD63, transcript level of hTERT, CD63, and IGFI-R (characterized by GC-rich motifs) and telomerase activity. Analysis of an hTERT core promoter reporter gene expression [enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)] in transiently transfected RPMI 8226 incubated with racemic and steric (+/-)-enantiomers of Thd was performed. A consistent reduction ( approximately 10-40%) in transcript levels of all three assayed genes in all three cell lines was demonstrated in the presence of racemic Thd. Significant reduction of EGFP was demonstrated in cells transfected with hTERT reporter gene and treated with racemic and (S)-Thd. Our results show that Thd's antimyeloma activity can be ascribed to the same mechanism responsible for its teratogenic effect and that the inhibition of GC-rich promoter genes is mostly attributed to the S-racemate. Indeed, this selectivity delineates GC-rich promoter genes as a unique group eligible for specific drug targeting.12865656
Reduced neutrophil CD10 expression in nonhuman primates and humans after in vivo challenge with E. coli or lipopolysaccharide.
Kaneko Toshihiro, Stearns-Kurosawa D J, Taylor Fletcher, Twigg Michaele, Osaki Koichi, Kinasewitz Gary T, Peer Glenn, Kurosawa Shinichiro
Shock (Augusta, Ga.)
CD10, also known as neutral endopeptidase or CALLA, is a major metalloproteinase that regulates levels of biologically active peptides that initiate inflammatory, cardiovascular, and neurogenic responses. Relative tissue expression levels of CD10, its peptide substrates, and their receptors constitute the basic regulatory mechanism. Neutrophils contain abundant CD10 and are rapid responders to an inflammatory septic challenge. Expression of neutrophil surface antigens in response to inflammation was studied in the primate model of Escherichia coli-mediated sepsis and in human volunteers injected with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). There was a rapid and profound (up to 95%) reduced baboon neutrophil CD10 expression in response to E. coli injections of 5.71 x 106 CFU/kg to 2.45 x 109 CFU/kg that gradually resolved to preinjection levels. The reduction was both dose and time dependent. Reduced CD10 antigen on mature baboon neutrophils and bands was observed by immunohistochemistry. Human volunteers challenged with 4ng/kg LPS experienced transient chills, nausea, fever, and myalgia. Up to approximately 20% of their neutrophils had reduced CD10 expression, peaking at 2 to 8 h after injection. By 24 h, neutrophil CD10 expression resolved to preinjection levels. In contrast, in both the baboon and human studies, other neutrophil surface antigens were only slightly decreased (CD11a) or increased (CD11b, CD18, CD35, CD66b, and CD63). These data present the novel observation that neutrophil CD10 expression decreases significantly in response to in vivo inflammatory challenge. This decrease appears to be unique to CD10 and may contribute to a reduced regulation of bioactive peptides released in response to inflammatory challenge.12848168
For allergy diagnostic flow cytometry, detection of CD203c instead of CD63 is not at all an improvement in other hands.
de Weck A L, Sanz M L
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
12845635
Autonomous histopathological regression of primary tumours associated with specific immune responses to cancer antigens.
Saleh Farid H, Crotty Kerry A, Hersey Peter, Menzies Scott W, Rahman Wassim
The Journal of pathology
Spontaneous histopathological regression of cancer has been reported. The involvement of the immune system in such regression has been advocated, leading to the theory of immunological surveillance against cancer. A prediction of this theory is that common tumour antigens can be recognized upon repeated exposure by cell-mediated immunity, which leads to tumour regression and the subsequent appearance of tumour antigen-loss variants. However, no direct evidence has been provided in non-viral-induced experimental animal models of primary malignancy or in human primary cancer. This study examined two groups of melanoma patients where histopathological regression of the primary tumour was observed. Many of the 23 patients with multiple (> or =3) primary melanomas showed significant regression of their last melanoma (median 33%, mean 40) compared with matched melanomas from patients with a single primary melanoma (median 0%, mean 12) (p=0.0080), or compared with their first primary melanoma (p=0.0013). Regression was consistent with an 'immunization effect' seen in murine tumour transplantation studies, where inoculation with > or =3 asynchronous tumours induces transplantation rejection on subsequent challenge. A significant decrease in the expression of the melanoma common tumour antigen MART-1 in the last primary tumour from multiple melanoma patients (median 8%, mean 24) versus matched single melanoma patients (median 79%, mean 68) (p=0.0041) and in the last versus first tumour in multiple primary patients was found (p=0.0083). Metastases from 17 patients whose primary skin melanomas had completely regressed (occult primary melanoma) also showed significant MART-1 loss (median 0%, mean 11) compared with matched metastases from patients with non-regressing primary melanoma (median 51%, mean 50) (p=0.0013). MART-1 antigen-loss variants observed in the multiple primary and occult primary patients correlated with the presence of peripheral blood MART-1-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) (p=0.03). No similar effects were observed with two other melanoma antigens, gp100 and CD63. Thus, in two groups of human melanoma patients, evidence is provided for histopathological tumour regression associated with cancer immune surveillance.
Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.12826159
Relationship between the expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on platelet surface in peripheral blood and the transplanted kidney function.
Zhang Y, Guan D L, Xia C Q, Han Z Y, Xu J J, Gao J Z, Wu K R, Zhang Y G, Guan D
Transplantation proceedings
To analyze the relationships between the expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on the platelet surface and the incidences of acute rejection and tubular necrosis as well as the recovery of graft function after renal transplantation.
The expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on platelet surfaces were assayed by flow cytometry in 86 patients with different stages of uremia before and after transplantation. Patients were divided into three groups: 29 patients with normal graft function, 30 with acute rejection, and 27 with acute tubular necrosis. Patients with acute rejection were randomly assigned into groups treated with or without anticoagulants.
The expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on platelet surfaces significantly increased (P <.05) among patients with acute rejection, as compared with those with normal graft function or acute tubular necrosis. Compared with controls, the expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 were lower among acute rejection patients who, received anticoagulant therapy. The recovery time for graft function shorter and, the 1-year patients and graft survival rates higher.
The pretransplant expression levels of CD61, CD63, and PAC-1 on platelet surface were significantly higher among patients with acute rejection, suggesting that this complication rather than acute tubular necrosis may be related to platelet activation. Patients with acute rejection displayed benefit from anticoagulant therapy.12815111
The relationship of von Willebrand factor binding to activated platelets from healthy neonates and adults.
Schmugge Markus, Rand Margaret Lucille, Bang Kyong Won Annie, Mody Meera, Dunn Michael Stephen, Amankwah Kofi Sarpong, Blanchette Victor Stanley, Freedman John
Pediatric research
von Willebrand Factor (VWF) is important in platelet adhesion and shear-dependent platelet activation. We performed flow cytometric analyses of VWF binding to and activation of platelets from healthy neonates, children, and adults. Platelets from cord blood (n = 38; gestational age: 36-42 wk; birth weight: 2.4-5.1 kg), neonatal venous blood (n = 19; d 2-3 of life), children (n = 15; age: 1.5-16.3 y), and adults (n = 22; age: 18-55 y) were studied. Binding of VWF was assessed using an antihuman VWF polyclonal antibody and a FITC-conjugated secondary antibody. Platelet activation was determined by the expression of CD62P, CD63, CD41, CD42b, activated GPIIb/IIIa (PAC-1), procoagulant surface (as reflected by annexin V binding), and microparticle formation. Although the mean percentage of VWF-positive platelets was not significantly higher in unstimulated platelets from 2- to 3-d-old neonates, their platelets were more activated than those from adults, and there was a positive correlation of VWF binding with platelet activation (CD62P: r = 0.74, p < 0.001; annexin V: r = 0.46, p < 0.05). In adults, after in vitro activation of platelets with thrombin and ADP, VWF binding to platelets increased and correlated significantly with CD62P expression (r = 0.71, p < 0.001). VWF binding to unstimulated neonatal platelets was, however, higher than that to in vitro-stimulated platelets from adults at the same level of expression of platelet activation markers. Further studies are required to assess the mechanism and significance of VWF binding to activated platelets in the neonatal period.12801323
Comments regarding 'Marked improvement of the basophil activation test by detecting CD203c instead of CD63' by Boumiza et al.
Ebo D G, Lechkar B, Schuerwegh A J, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
12783061
Immunophenotypic analysis of human gingival fibroblasts and its regulation by Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF).
Di Domenico G, Del Vecchio L, Postiglione L, Ramaglia L
Minerva stomatologica
The aim of the present study was to perform an immunophenotypic analysis of human gingival fibroblast cells and its eventual modulation by Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF).
Gingival fibroblasts were derived from gingival biopsy of 15 healthy subjects. The presence of fibroblast cells in culture and the absence of epithelial cells was performed with fluorescence microscopy using vimentin and cytokeratin markers, respectively. Molecular expression of gingival fibroblast cell membrane was carried out with monoclonal antibodies by flow cytometry analysis. Human recombinant GM-CSF at the concentration of 200 ng/ml was used for the in vitro stimulation of gingival fibroblasts. Statistical analysis was performed using the Student "t"-test.
Human gingival fibroblasts express a wide surface molecular panel including mainly CD59, CD99, CD9, CD95, CD55, CD63, CD26, CD117, CD71 and CD86. The GM-CSF seems to regulate the CD49B expression positively and the CD40 and CD103 expression negatively.
Results show that GM-CSF is able to modulate the in vitro expression of some membrane molecules of gingival fibroblasts and therefore it may regulate, in vivo, peculiar specific biological functions of gingival tissue.12782946
The effects of doxorubicin on apoptosis and adhesion molecules of normal peripheral blood leukocytes-an ex vivo study.
Ciobotaro Pnina, Drucker Liat, Neumann Avivit, Shapiro Hava, Shapira Jermey, Radnay Judith, Lishner Michael
Anti-cancer drugs
This ex vivo study was designed to evaluate the effect of doxorubicin (Dox) on normal peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) in terms of apoptosis and membranal expression levels of adhesion molecules. Blood was drawn immediately prior to and after Dox administration from 21 breast cancer patients, and incubated at room temperature for 24 h. Flow cytometry was employed in analysis of apoptosis with Annexin-V and protein membranal expression levels with monoclonal antibodies to CD49d, CD18, CD11a-c and CD63. Dox induced statistically significant apoptosis in all three major PBL subpopulations (p<0.01). Between 70 and 90% of samples underwent apoptosis in all PBL subgroups. No significant change was observed in the membranal level of CD63, CD49d and CD11a-c after chemotherapy in any PBL subpopulation. However, a significant reduction in the membranal level of CD18 was demonstrated in polymorphonuclear cells after Dox (p<0.005) both in apoptotic and non-apoptotic cells (p<0.05), suggesting a direct effect of Dox rather than an apoptosis-associated phenomenon. We observed the expected leukopenia 10 days after Dox administration with no correlation to apoptosis, suggesting that leukopenia by Dox is largely attributed to toxicity of blood progenitors.12780568
CD32-mediated platelet aggregation in vitro by anti-thymocyte globulin: implication of therapy-induced in vivo thrombocytopenia.
Ankersmit Hendrik Jan, Roth Georg Alexander, Moser Bernhard, Zuckermann Andreas, Brunner Markus, Rosin Christiane, Buchta Christoph, Bielek Edith, Schmid Werner, Jensen-Jarolim Erika, Wolner Ernst, Boltz-Nitulescu George, Volf Ivo
American journal of transplantation : official journal of the American Society of Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons
Induction therapy with polyclonal antithymocyte-globulin (ATG) is widely used in the prophylaxis and treatment of acute cardiac-allograft rejection. Thrombocytopenia, however, is a major side-effect of ATG therapy and its mechanisms are poorly understood. The influence of ATG on platelet aggregation was studied aggregometrically, expression of platelet surface activation antigens CD62P and CD63 was determined by flow cytometry analysis, and electron microscopy was utilized to determine thrombocyte morphology. Treatment of platelets with ATG markedly induced aggregation, whereas OKT3 or anti-IL-2R antibodies did not. Furthermore, platelets incubated with ATG featured an up-regulation of the surface activation markers CD62P and CD63, secretion of platelet-bound sCD40L (CD154) and increased signs of aggregation in electron microscopy analysis. The capacity of ATG to induce platelet aggregation was completely blocked by antibodies against the low-affinity Fc IgG receptor (CD32). Since blocking of CD32 abrogates platelet aggregation, we suggest that CD32 plays a crucial role in ATG-induced thrombocytopenia.12771043
Molecular profiling of hepatocellular carcinomas developing spontaneously in acyl-CoA oxidase deficient mice: comparison with liver tumors induced in wild-type mice by a peroxisome proliferator and a genotoxic carcinogen.
Meyer Kirstin, Lee Ju-Seog, Dyck Patricia A, Cao Wen-Qing, Rao M Sambasiva, Thorgeirsson Snorri S, Reddy Janardan K
Carcinogenesis
By using cDNA microarrays, we studied the expression profiles of 26 hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) developing spontaneously in peroxisomal fatty acyl-CoA oxidase null (AOX-/-) mice. The development of liver tumors in AOX-/- mice is due to sustained activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) by the unmetabolized substrates of AOX, which serve as natural PPARalpha ligands. We then compared the AOX-/- liver tumor expression profiles with those induced by ciprofibrate, a non-genotoxic peroxisome proliferator, or by the genotoxic carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DENA) to discern differences in gene expression patterns that may predict or distinguish PPARalpha-mediated liver tumors from genotoxically derived tumors. Our results show that HCCs developing in AOX-/- mice share a number of deregulated (up- or down-regulated) genes with ciprofibrate-induced liver tumors. The overall commonality of expression between AOX-/- and ciprofibrate-induced liver tumors but not with DENA-induced tumors strongly implicates the activation of PPARalpha and PPARalpha-regulated genes in liver, including those participating in lipid catabolism, as key factors in the development of HCC in AOX-/- and in ciprofibrate-treated mice. Northern blot analysis confirmed the differential expression of some of the genes identified in the present study, and also some genes identified previously as PPARalpha regulated, such as CD36, lymphocyte antigen 6 complex locus (Ly-6D), and C3f. We found a panel of 12 genes upregulated in all three classes of liver tumors, namely AOX-/-, ciprofibrate-induced and DENA-induced. These include an uncharacterized RIKEN cDNA, lipocalin 2, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1, Ly-6D and CD63 among others. In conclusion, these results identify distinguishing features between non-genotoxic and genotoxic carcinogen derived liver tumors as well as genes that are upregulated in both types and suggest that RIKEN cDNA, Ly-6D and lipocalin 2 in particular appear to be desirable molecular markers for further study in liver carcinogenesis and progression.12766069
Hr44 secreted with exosomes: loss from ciliary epithelium in response to inflammation.
McKechnie Nicol M, Copland David, Braun Gabriele
Investigative ophthalmology & visual science
Hr44 is a target antigen for cross-reactive antibodies to the Onchocerca volvulus antigen Ov39. This study was undertaken to determine the epitopes recognized by antibodies to hr44, including Ov39/hr44 cross-reacting antibodies, and to use these antibodies to determine the distribution of hr44 in normal and inflamed intraocular epithelia and ARPE-19 cell cultures.
Epitopes were identified with a peptide-based ELISA and competition ELISA. Immunostaining for hr44 and CD63 was conducted on control and inflamed ocular tissues. Exosomes were isolated from ARPE-19 cell cultures and analyzed by Western blot and electron microscopy.
Linear epitopes and the Ov39 cross-reactive epitope of hr44 were identified. Immunohistology indicated that hr44 is present in vesicular structures of the iris and ciliary body and is lost from the epithelial layers of inflamed eyes coincidentally with CD63. A 66-kDa variant of hr44 is present in exosomes purified from ARPE-19 cell culture supernatants.
Because hr44 is a component of exosomes produced by ARPE-19 cells, the coincident loss of hr44 and CD63 in inflamed epithelia indicates that exosomes may be released from intraocular epithelia in response to inflammation. This notion suggests that exosomes shed by intraocular epithelial cells influence T-cell survival and antigen presentation in the eye without direct cell-cell contact and have a role in the maintenance of ocular immune privilege.12759369
Ectopic expression of syntaxin 1 in the ER redirects TI-VAMP- and cellubrevin-containing vesicles.
Martinez-Arca Sonia, Proux-Gillardeaux Veronique, Alberts Philipp, Louvard Daniel, Galli Thierry
Journal of cell science
SNARE proteins are key mediators of membrane fusion. Their function in ensuring compartmental specificity of membrane fusion has been suggested by in vitro studies but not demonstrated in vivo. We show here that ectopic expression of the plasma membrane t-SNARE heavy chain syntaxin 1 in the endoplasmic reticulum induces the redistribution of its cognate vesicular SNAREs, TI-VAMP and cellubrevin, and its light chain t-SNARE SNAP-23. These effects were prevented by co-expressing nSec1. Expression of syntaxin 1 alone impaired the cell surface expression of TI-VAMP and cellubrevin but not the recycling of transferrin receptor. TI-VAMP, cellubrevin and SNAP-23 associated in vivo with exogenous syntaxin 1. Redistribution of TI-VAMP in the ER of syntaxin-1-expressing cells was microtubule dependent and impaired the trafficking of CD63, a cargo of TI-VAMP-containing vesicles. We conclude that the destination of v-SNAREs is driven by their specific interaction with cognate t-SNAREs. Our in vivo data provide strong support for the theory that highly specific v-SNARE-t-SNARE interactions control compartmental specificity of membrane fusion.12757465
CD63 expression by flow cytometry in the in vitro diagnosis of allergy to omeprazole.
Gamboa P M, Sanz M L, Urrutia I, Jáuregui I, Antépara I, Diéguez I, De Weck A L
Allergy
12755696
Differential post-translational modification of CD63 molecules during maturation of human dendritic cells.
Engering Anneke, Kuhn Lotte, Fluitsma Donna, Hoefsmit Elisabeth, Pieters Jean
European journal of biochemistry / FEBS
The capacity of dendritic cells to initiate T cell responses is related to their ability to redistribute MHC class II molecules from the intracellular MHC class II compartments to the cell surface. This redistribution occurs during dendritic cell development as they are converted from an antigen capturing, immature dendritic cell into an MHC class II-peptide presenting mature dendritic cell. During this maturation, antigen uptake and processing are down-regulated and peptide-loaded class II complexes become expressed in a stable manner on the cell surface. Here we report that the tetraspanin CD63, that associates with intracellularly localized MHC class II molecules in immature dendritic cells, was modified post-translationally by poly N-acetyl lactosamine addition during maturation. This modification of CD63 was accompanied by a change in morphology of MHC class II compartments from typical multivesicular organelles to structures containing densely packed lipid moieties. Post-translational modification of CD63 may be involved in the functional and morphological changes of MHC class II compartments that occur during dendritic cell maturation.12752589
CD63 expression on basophils as a tool for the diagnosis of pollen-associated food allergy: sensitivity and specificity.
Erdmann S M, Heussen N, Moll-Slodowy S, Merk H F, Sachs B
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Basophil activation is associated with the expression of CD63. Because allergens can induce basophil activation by cross-linking specific IgE, increased CD63 expression has been proposed as a novel in vitro test for immediate type allergy.
We compared the CD63-based basophil activation test (BAT) in the diagnosis of allergy to carrot, celery and hazelnut with skin prick tests (SPT) and measurement of allergen-specific IgE.
Twenty-nine patients with a history of an oral allergy syndrome induced by carrot, celery or hazelnut (n = 20 for each allergen) and 20 controls were studied. SPT were performed with standardized and native carrot, celery and hazelnut extracts. Allergen-specific IgE was determined by the CAP FEIA method and basophil activation was determined by flow cytometry upon double staining with anti-IgE/anti-CD63 mAb.
SPT with native carrot, celery and hazelnut showed sensitivities of 100%, 100% and 90%, and specificities of 80%, 80% and 90%. SPT with commercial extracts of the same allergens gave sensitivities of 85%, 80% and 85%, and specificities of 80%, 80% and 90%. Sensitivity of allergen-specific IgE and the BAT for carrot, celery and hazelnut was 80% vs. 85%, 70% vs. 85%, and 80% vs. 90%, with corresponding specificities of 80% vs. 85%, 80% vs. 80%, and 95% vs. 90%. The cut-off for a positive BAT was 10% CD63+ basophils. Moreover, there was a positive correlation between IgE reactivity and the number of CD63+ basophils for all food allergens (carrot: r = 0.69, celery: r = 0.67, hazelnut: r = 0.66).
Quantification of basophil activation by CD63 expression is a valuable new in vitro method for diagnosis of immediate type food sensitization. Although double-blind placebo-controlled food challenges remain the gold standard, the CD63-based BAT may supplement routine diagnostic tests such as SPT or allergen-specific IgE in the future.12747186
Clinical observation on shu xin yi mai capsules for prevention of recurrent stricture after coronary artery introducing treatment.
Duan Xuezhong, Yang Dingyou, Zhang Yunhui, Zhou Ciqing
Journal of traditional Chinese medicine = Chung i tsa chih ying wen pan / sponsored by All-China Association of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Shu Xin Yi Mai Capsules ([symbol: see text]) combined with western medicine was used in the routine treatment of 22 cases who successfully received coronary artery introducing therapy (Chinese-western medicine group), and the results was compared with the 26 cases treated routinely with simple western medicine in the control group (western medicine group). It was found that both the recurrence rate of angina pectoris and the incidence rate of recurrent stricture in the Chinese-western medicine group were significantly lower than that in the control group (both P < 0.05). There was no significant difference between the two groups in expression of platelet activating molecules CD62P (alpha-granular membrane protein), CD63 (lysosome intact membrane protein) and CD41 (glucoprotein IIb) before the treatment, but with a significant difference after the treatment (P < 0.05).12740908
Interspecies contamination of the KM3 cell line: implications for CD63 function in melanoma metastasis.
Moseley Gregory W, Elliott Jill, Wright Mark D, Partridge Lynda J, Monk Peter N
International journal of cancer. Journal international du cancer
CD63 is a member of the tetraspanin superfamily of membrane glycoproteins that has been hypothesised to provide a structural network in the organisation of large multimolecular microdomains at cell membranes. Detailed analyses of the role of CD63 in these complexes through mutagenic studies have been limited, however, by the ubiquitous cellular expression of CD63 in vivo and in vitro. In an attempt to define CD63-null cell lines, we have analysed the expression of CD63 and other tetraspanins on a panel of human cancer cell lines. Similar expression patterns were seen between cell lines from melanomas, breast cancers and prostate cancers. The melanoma cell line KM3, however, described previously as a CD63-null human cell line, was found to express none of the 7 human tetraspanins tested. KM3 was identified definitively as a rat cell line by analysis of karyotype and antigen expression. Notably, KM3 was found to express the rat homologue of CD63. Conclusions concerning the function of human CD63 drawn from studies using KM3 cells therefore require re-evaluation as does the frequently cited hypothesis that CD63 expression is linked to melanoma progression. As KM3 is the only cell line thus far identified as CD63 negative, these results highlight the necessity for the production of a CD63 null system.
Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.12738400
Effects of eicosapentaenoic acid on platelet activation markers and cell adhesion molecules in hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Nomura Shosaku, Kanazawa Shigenori, Fukuhara Shirou
Journal of diabetes and its complications
We compared the levels of microparticles, platelet activation markers, soluble cell adhesion molecules, soluble selectins, and antioxidized low-density lipoprotein (anti-Ox LDL) antibody between patients with hyperlipidemia and control subjects. Binding of anti-glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa and anti-GPIb monoclonal antibodies to platelets did not differ significantly between the hyperlipidemic patients and controls. However, expression of activation markers (CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, and annexin V) by platelets was higher in the hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes. The levels of platelet-derived microparticles (PDMPs) and monocyte-derived microparticles (MDMPs) were significantly different in hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes and controls. Soluble P-selectin (sP-selectin), soluble E-selectin (sE-selectin), and anti-Ox LDL antibody also showed higher levels in the hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes. After treatment with eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), the levels of CD62P, CD63, annexin V, PDMPs, and MDMPs, sE-selectin, and oxidized LDL antibody were reduced significantly. Triglyceride (TG) and total cholesterol levels were also decreased. Anti-Ox LDL antibodies and MDMPs were correlated positively with platelet CD62P (plt-CD62P) levels. These findings suggest that in hyperlipidemic patients with Type 2 diabetes, EPA may prevent complications caused by oxidized LDL, E-selectin, and activated platelets or monocytes.12725440
Antigenic profile of human thymus in concurrence with "Clusters of Thymic Epithelial Staining" classification.
Kaymaz F Figen, Dağdeviren Attila, Aşan Esin
Annals of anatomy = Anatomischer Anzeiger : official organ of the Anatomische Gesellschaft
We examined the expression of various CD coded or not yet defined antigens in human thymus samples using indirect immunoperoxidase and immunoflourescent techniques. Data obtained are presented in concurrence with Clusters of Thymic Epithelial Staining (CTES) classification for various monoclonal antibodies recognizing CD antigens (CD1, CD1a, CD6, CD9, CD14, CD16, CD29, CD30, CD32, CD44, CD45RB, CD47, CD48, CD49a, CD49b, CD49c, CD49d, CD49e, CD49f, CD51, CD53, CD54, CD56, CD57, CD63, CD85, CD95, CD98, CD102, CD103, CD106, CD109, CD146, CD147, CD148, CD151, CD152, CD158a, CD158b, CD164, CD165, CD166) and for monoclonal antibodies 1B10, 5G7, A4, BD46, BLTZ, HP1C5, IND.64, M72, WU947 whose specifities are not yet defined. Some of the mAbs such as CD49f, IND.64 and BD46 are detected as good markers for specific cell types or compartments. Significance of the presence of these antigens on thymic epithelial cells at certain locations is briefly discussed.12722969
Anaphylactic reaction after artificial insemination.
Orta Marta, Ordoqui Elena, Aranzábal Ascensión, Fernández Cristina, Bartolomé Borja, Sanz Maria Luisa
Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology
Bovine seroalbumin is known as an allergen for human beings, but reactions to it in an artificial insemination procedure are much rarer. We report a case of anaphylaxis after intrauterine insemination (IUI) in which sensitization to bovine serum albumin (BSA) is demonstrated.
Report the allergy evaluation performed in a patient who suffered a severe reaction immediately after an IUI procedure.
A 33-year-old woman was referred because of an anaphylactic reaction after a second trial of IUI. She developed pruritus, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, bronchospasm, and generalized urticaria. She had an atopic medical history of pollen allergy and sensitization to cat epithelium. She had never had trouble with minor surgery and she usually uses latex material. She had never received heterologous sera before. Her husband's semen for the IUI was processed in a standard fluid medium called upgraded INRA B 2 (Laboratoires CCD, Paris, France), which contains amino acids, lipids, vitamins, BSA, penicillin, and streptomycin in addition to inorganic salts.
Skin prick tests with the medium and BSA 10 mg/mL were positive. In vitro studies demonstrated an immunoglobulin E binding protein of 60 to 65 kDa and mast cells and basophil activation (CD63 expression) against BSA contained in the medium. Cutaneous and challenge tests with penicillin and streptomycin were negative.
We consider the BSA in the semen culture medium to be the factor which triggered the anaphylactic reaction. This case supports the authors who state that media free from heterologous proteins should be used for human application, especially on atopic patients, to avoid sensitization.12708979
Use of CD63 expression as a marker of in vitro basophil activation and leukotriene determination in metamizol allergic patients.
Gamboa P M, Sanz M L, Caballero M R, Antépara I, Urrutia I, Jáuregui I, González G, Diéguez I, De Weck A L
Allergy
We assessed the reliability of basophil activation test (FAST) and sulphidoleukotriene production (CAST) in the in vitro diagnosis of allergy to metamizol, evaluating its sensitivity and specificity.
Twenty-six patients allergic to metamizol and 30 control individuals were studied. Skin tests with metamizol, FAST, and CAST were performed.
FAST sensitivity was 42.3% and specificity 100%. The PPV of FAST is 100% and the NPV 99.4%. The likelihood ratio for a positive value cannot be calculated because the specificity is 100% and the likelihood ratio for a negative value is 0.58. CAST sensitivity was 52%, and specificity 90%. The PPV of the test is 5% and the NPV 99.5%. The likelihood ratio for a positive result was 5.2 and that for a negative result 0.53. FAST detects a larger number of cases when patients are studied within the first 6 months after the clinical reaction (chi = 4.2, P = 0.04) than later. Together with skin tests, FAST allowed detection of 69.2% patients allergic to metamizol, the same as CAST 76%. The joint use of the three techniques allowed identification of 76.9% of cases.
FAST and CAST are useful for the diagnosis of allergy to pyrazolones. Its usefulness clearly increases when recent reactions are studied.12707356
Delta 12-prostaglandin J2, a plasma metabolite of prostaglandin D2, causes eosinophil mobilization from the bone marrow and primes eosinophils for chemotaxis.
Heinemann Akos, Schuligoi Rufina, Sabroe Ian, Hartnell Adele, Peskar Bernhard A
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
PGD(2), a major mast cell mediator, is a potent eosinophil chemoattractant and is thought to be involved in eosinophil recruitment to sites of allergic inflammation. In plasma, PGD(2) is rapidly transformed into its major metabolite delta(12)-PGJ(2), the effect of which on eosinophil migration has not yet been characterized. In this study we found that delta(12)-PGJ(2) was a highly effective chemoattractant and inducer of respiratory burst in human eosinophils, with the same efficacy as PGD(2), PGJ(2), or 15-deoxy-delta(12,14)-PGJ(2). Moreover, pretreatment of eosinophils with delta(12)-PGJ(2) markedly enhanced the chemotactic response to eotaxin, and in this respect delta(12)-PGJ(2) was more effective than PGD(2). delta(12)-PGJ(2)-induced facilitation of eosinophil migration toward eotaxin was not altered by specific inhibitors of intracellular signaling pathways relevant to the chemotactic response, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (LY-294002), mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase (U-0126), or p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (SB-202190). Desensitization studies using calcium flux suggested that delta(12)-PGJ(2) signaled through the same receptor, CRTH2, as PGD(2). Finally, delta(12)-PGJ(2) was able to mobilize mature eosinophils from the bone marrow of the guinea pig isolated perfused hind limb. Given that delta(12)-PGJ(2) is present in the systemic circulation at relevant levels, a role for this PGD(2) metabolite in eosinophil release from the bone marrow and in driving eosinophil recruitment to sites of inflammation appears conceivable.12705901
Tetraspanin CD63 promotes targeting and lysosomal proteolysis of membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase.
Takino Takahisa, Miyamori Hisashi, Kawaguchi Noriko, Uekita Takamasa, Seiki Motoharu, Sato Hiroshi
Biochemical and biophysical research communications
Membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) is known to be internalized from cell surface, however, the fate of internalized MT1-MMP is still unknown. Here we demonstrate that at least a part of internalized MT1-MMP is targeted for lysosomal proteolysis. Treatment with an inhibitor of lysosomal proteinases chloroquine suppressed degradation of internalized MT1-MMP and induced accumulation of MT1-MMP in CD63-positive lysosomes. Ectopic expression of CD63 accelerated degradation of MT1-MMP, which was blocked by chloroquine. MT1-MMP, and CD63 were shown to form a complex through hemopexin-like domain of MT1-MMP and N-terminal region of CD63, and thus accelerated degradation of MT1-MMP was not observed with mutants lacking these domains. CD63 mutant lacking lysosomal targeting motif was unable to promote MT1-MMP degradation. These results suggest that CD63 regulates MT1-MMP by targeting to lysosomes.12704209
Co-localization of the mammalian hemochromatosis gene product (HFE) and a newly identified transferrin receptor (TfR2) in intestinal tissue and cells.
Griffiths William J H, Cox Timothy M
The journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry : official journal of the Histochemistry Society
Mutations in the HFE gene and a newly identified second transferrin receptor gene, TfR2, cause hemochromatosis. The cognate proteins, HFE and TfR2, are therefore of key importance in human iron homeostasis. HFE is expressed in small intestinal crypt cells where transferrin-iron entry may determine subsequent iron absorption by mature enterocytes, but the physiological function of TfR2 is unknown. Using specific peptide antisera, we examined the duodenal localization of HFE and TfR2 in humans and mice, with and without HFE deficiency, by confocal microscopy. We also investigated potential interactions of these proteins in human intestinal cells in situ. Duodenal expression of HFE and TfR2 (but not TfR1) in wild-type mice and humans was restricted to crypt cells, in which they co-localized. HFE deficiency disrupted this interaction, altering the cellular distribution of TfR2 in human crypts. In human Caco-2 cells, HFE and TfR2 co-localized to a distinct CD63-negative vesicular compartment showing marked signal enhancement on exposure to iron-saturated transferrin ligand, indicating that HFE preferentially interacts with TfR2 in a specialized early endosomal transport pathway for transferrin-iron. This interaction occurs specifically in small intestinal crypt cells that differentiate to become iron-absorbing enterocytes. Our immunohistochemical findings provide evidence for a novel mechanism for the regulation of iron balance in mammals.12681441
Carbon monoxide modulates the response of human basophils to FcepsilonRI stimulation through the heme oxygenase pathway.
Vannacci Alfredo, Baronti Roberto, Zagli Giovanni, Marzocca Cosimo, Pierpaoli Simone, Bani Daniele, Passani Maria Beatrice, Mannaioni Pier Francesco, Masini Emanuela
European journal of pharmacology
We report the effects of exogenous and endogenous carbon monoxide (CO) on the immunological activation of human basophils. Hemin (1-100 microM), a heme oxygenase substrate analogue, significantly increased the formation of bilirubin from partially purified human basophils, thus indicating that these cells express heme oxygenase. This effect was reversed by preincubating the cells for 30 min with Zn-protoporphyrin IX (100 microM), a heme oxygenase inhibitor. Hemin (100 microM) also decreased immunoglobulin G anti-Fcepsilon (anti-IgE)-induced activation of basophils, measured by the expression of a membrane granule-associated protein, identified as cluster differentiation protein 63 (CD63), and by histamine release. These effects were reversed by Zn-protoporphyrin IX (100 microM), by oxyhemoglobin (HbO(2)), a CO scavenger (100 microM), and by 1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a] quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ), an inhibitor of the soluble guanylyl cyclase (100 microM). Exposure of basophils to exogenous CO (10 microM for 30 min) also decreased their activation, while nitrogen (N(2)) was ineffective. HbO(2) and ODQ reversed the inhibition, reversing both membrane protein CD63 expression and histamine release to basal values. Both hemin and exogenous CO significantly raised cGMP levels in basophils and blunted the rise of calcium levels caused by immunological activation. This study suggests that CO increases cGMP formation, which in turn induces a fall in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration, thereby resulting in the inhibition of human basophil activation.12695747
Aspirin inhibits surface glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, P-selectin, CD63, and CD107a receptor expression on human platelets.
McKenzie Marcus E, Malinin Alex I, Bell Christopher R, Dzhanashvili Alex, Horowitz Eric D, Oshrine Benjamin R, Atar Dan, Serebruany Victor L
Blood coagulation & fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
Platelet inhibition after aspirin therapy reduces the risk for the development of acute coronary syndromes. However, the mechanism by which aspirin affect platelets other than by prostaglandin blockade is unclear. We sought to determine the in vitro effects of aspirin on the surface expression of nine platelet receptors using whole blood flow cytometry. Blood from 24 healthy volunteers was incubated for 30 min with 1.8 and 7.2 mg/l phosphate-buffered saline-diluted acetylsalicylic acid in the presence or absence of apyrase. Platelet serotonin release, and the surface expression of platelet receptors with or without apyrase were determined using the following monoclonal antibodies: anit-CD41 [glycoprotein (GP)IIb/IIIa], CD42b (GPIb), CD62p (P-selectin), CD51/CD61 (vitronectin receptor), CD31 [platelet/endothelial cellular adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1)], CD107a [lysosomal associated membrane protein (LAMP)-1], CD107b (LAMP-2), CD63 (LIMP or LAMP-3), and CD151 (PETA-3). Samples were then immediately fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde, and run on the flow cytometer within 48 h. Aspirin does not affect serotonin release from human platelets. Dose-dependent inhibition of GPIIb/IIIa, P-selectin, CD63, and CD107a receptor expression was observed in the aspirin-treated whole-blood samples. Apyrase potentiates the effects of aspirin, and independently inhibits PECAM-1. In addition to the known effect of irreversibly inhibiting platelet cyclooxygenase-1, thereby blocking thromboxane A(2) synthesis, it appears that aspirin exhibits direct effects on selective major platelet receptors.12682908
Molecular cloning of the cell surface antigen identified by the osteoprogenitor-specific monoclonal antibody, HOP-26.
Zannettino Andrew C W, Harrison Kate, Joyner Clive J, Triffitt James T, Simmons Paul J
Journal of cellular biochemistry
Bone is a highly organized structure comprising a calcified connective tissue matrix formed by mature osteoblasts, which develop from the proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells. The osteogenic cell lineage is thought to arise from a population of uncommitted multipotential stromal precursor cells (SPC) which reside close to all bone surfaces, in the bone marrow spaces and the surrounding connective tissue. These SPC also give rise to related cell lineages which form cartilage, smooth muscle, fat, and fibrous tissue. Due to the lack of well defined cell surface markers, little is known of the precise developmentally regulated changes in phenotype which occur during the differentiation and maturation of human osteoprogenitor cells into functional osteoblasts and ultimately, terminally differentiated osteocytes. In order to identify antibody reagents with greater specificity for osteoprogenitors we generated a series of antibodies following immunization with freshly isolated human bone marrow stromal fibroblasts. One such antibody, HOP-26, reacts with a cell surface antigen expressed by SPC and developing bone cells. We now demonstrate that this mAb identifies a member of the tetraspan family of cell surface glycoproteins, namely CD63. Western blot analysis of human bone marrow stromal cells (HBMSC) has revealed that like a well defined CD63 mAb 12F12, HOP-26 interacts with a heavily glycosylated cell surface protein with an apparent molecular weight of 50-60 kD.
Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.12679127
Activation of circulating platelets in patients with peripheral arterial disease during digital subtraction angiography and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty.
Buchholz Alexander Matthias, Bruch Leonhard, Schulte Karl Ludwig
Thrombosis research
Platelet activation plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease (CHD), peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and cerebral ischaemia, the three main clinical manifestations of atherosclerosis. Circulating-activated platelets are thought to trigger ischaemic complications after angiography, angioplasty and vascular surgery. We studied activation of circulating thrombocytes in patients with PAD and evaluated the influence on platelet activation of intraarterial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) in the area of the lower extremities. Our study included 16 control subjects with PAD (clinical stage IIb according to Fontaine), 25 healthy control subjects and 34 PAD patients (clinical stage IIb according to Fontaine), 14 of whom we examined during DSA, 10 during PTA and 10 which we studied during both interventions. To characterize platelet ex vivo activation, the expression of activation-dependent platelet antigens (CD62 and CD63) was measured using flow cytometry. Platelet sensitization was analysed by an additional in vitro activation. Our results show that angioplasty in peripheral vessels causes activation and presumably slight migration or a reduction in the life span of circulating thrombocytes immediately after the PTA procedure and up to 4 h afterwards. DSA was also found to be associated with platelet activation, sensitization and presumptive minor migration or shortened life span of circulating platelets. Immediately after the intervention, PTA seems to influence platelet migration or shortened lifetime of platelets to a greater extent than DSA. We postulate that this is mainly induced by dilatation. More activated and sensitized thrombocytes circulated in patients with PAD compared to healthy control subjects. This supports our assumption that preactivated platelets are particularly involved in activation, sensitization and migration processes or affected by a reduced life span.12676805
Chlamydia pneumoniae affect surfactant trafficking and secretion due to changes of type II cell cytoskeleton.
Wissel Heide, Schulz Christian, Rüdiger Mario, Krüll Matthias, Stevens Paul A, Wauer Roland R
American journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology
Understanding the surfactant dysfunction by gram-negative bacteria pulmonary infection, the intracellular fate of Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn), its interaction with uptake, recycling, and secretion of surfactant and with the cytoskeleton of type II pneumocytes was investigated. Bacteria colocalized with surfactant protein (SP)-A-mediated endocytosed lipid and early endosomes (EEA1- and Rab5-positive) after 3 and 6 h of infection. No specific contact with late endosomes (Rab7- and M6PR-positive), lysosomal, or lamellar body markers (CD63, 3C9) was found after 12 h of infection. In Cpn-infected cells, SP-A-mediated lipid uptake was significantly increased. After SP-A-mediated lipid uptake followed by "re-secretion," 90% of the internalized lipid remained intracellularly. SP-A and lipid did strongly colocalize with early endosomes. Internalized SP-A cannot be resecreted rapidly to plasma membrane, and lipid is not transported toward late endosomes (Rab7- and M6PR-positive) or lamellar bodies (CD63- and 3C9-positive). These results indicate that increased surfactant internalization is caused by an inhibition in intracellular surfactant transport. Accumulation of SP-A-mediated lipid was associated with changes in beta-tubulin. Increases in surfactant secretion were associated with changes in F-actin. We postulate that Cpn infection of type II cells causes changes of the cytoskeleton, and that these effects are associated with alterations in intracellular transport and secretion of surfactant.12673955
[Chronic urticaria. Clinical evolution, autologous serum test, count and activation of basophils].
Galassi Nora, Riera Norma, Rey Graciela, Bracco Maria Marta E, Malbrán Alejandro
Medicina
Recent advances on the pathogenesis of chronic urticaria have defined a group of patients with autoantibodies directed to the IgE or to the alpha chain of the Fc high affinity receptor of IgE, Fc epsilon RI alpha. These antibodies are detected in vivo through the autologous serum test (AST) and in vitro with a variety of techniques. We here describe 37 patients with chronic urticaria, 28 female and 9 male, with a f/m ratio of 3.1. Mean age at onset was 36.5 years (range 16-78). AST was positive in 25 (68%) of 37 patients. Serum induced a wheal significantly larger than plasma (122 +/- 78 mm2 vs 57 +/- 66 mm2, p < 0.05). Median persistence of the chronic urticaria, estimated by Kaplan-Meyer analysis, was 437 days, with no difference between AST(+) and AST(-) patients (437 vs. 369, p = 0.18). Mean IgE concentration was 157 +/- 173 IU/mL, as expected in an unselected population. Basophil count was lower in patients compared with controls (17 +/- 12 cel/microL vs. 43 +/- 27 cel/microL, p < 0.008). Only sera from 2/7 (28.6%) patients AST (+) and very low basophil count consistently induced expression of CD63. This effect was abrogated in non-releasing basophils, confirming the presence of antibodies directed to the Fc epsilon RI alpha-IgE. We conclude that functional antibodies are present in only a minority of patients and that their identification does not predict the outcome.12649164
Sorting of soluble TNF-receptor for granule storage in hematopoietic cells as a principle for targeting of selected proteins to inflamed sites.
Gao Ying, Rosén Hanna, Johnsson Ellinor, Calafat Jero, Tapper Hans, Olsson Inge
Blood
Hematopoietic cells have secretory lysosomes that degranulate at the inflammatory site upon stimulation. We asked whether one could target exogenous proteins with a therapeutic potential to secretory lysosomes in hematopoietic cells. For this purpose, we expressed a soluble tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor form (sTNFR1) in hematopoietic cell lines. In order to accomplish targeting to secretory lysosomes, both endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention and constitutive secretion have to be prevented. ER export was facilitated by addition of a transmembrane (tm) sequence, and constitutive secretion was overcome by incorporating a cytosolic sorting signal (Y) from CD63. This signal directed the resulting sTNFR1-tm-Y to secretory lysosomes. Confirmation of these results was provided by biosynthetic radiolabeling, subcellular fractionation, immunofluorescence microscopy, and immunoelectron microscopy. The tm-Y fragment was cleaved by proteolysis, resulting in generation of the membrane-free sTNFR1 in secretory lysosomes. Our results suggest a potential for using the storage organelles of hematopoietic cells as vehicles for targeting sites of inflammation with therapeutically active agents.12641656
Brown Norway rat ovalbumin-specific immunoglobulin E antibodies increase the human basophil expression of CD63 marker.
Bellou A, Saint-Laudy J, Knippels L, Montémont C, Vauthier E, Gerard P, Pellegrom H, Koerkamp E K, Lesesve J F, Guéant J L, Lambert H, Mallié J P
Scandinavian journal of immunology
Anaphylactic shock is an immunoglobulin E (IgE)-dependent hypersensitivity. Biological tests like leucocyte histamine release (LHR) and human basophil activation (HBA), frequently used in human allergy, reflect both the amount of IgE fixed on cells and the cellular reactivity. To assess whether serum-specific IgE from Brown Norway (BN) rats prepared for ovalbumin (OVA)-induced anaphylactic shocks can activate human basophils which has a potential interest in experimental allergy: such a test could rapidly assert an IgE sensitization in laboratory animals genetically T-helper 2 (Th2)-predisposed. Rats (n = 39) were immunized three times (day 0, day 5 and day 21) with OVA injected subcutaneously. One week after the third immunization, a shock was induced with an intravenous (i.v.) bolus of OVA. Sensitization was assessed by passive cutaneous anaphylaxis (PCA) test and dosages of serum IgE antibodies anti-OVA by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Blood basophils were counted before and during the shock. Before the shock induction (at day 21), an LHR test was performed on rat blood, and human basophils were sensitized with rat sera. HBA was demonstrated by the increase in the percentage of cells expressing CD63 antigen membrane, measured by flow cytometry. Twenty-one days after the first subcutaneous (s.c.) immunization, the rat serum induced a significant HBA. HBA was observed neither with the same serum previously heated nor with the serum from nonimmunized rats (NIRs). OVA-specific IgEs were significantly increased in immunized rat (IR) serum. The PCA test was negative when the serum was previously heated (56 degrees C). We never observed any circulating basophils, and LHR test was negative. After OVA i.v. administration, all IRs died rapidly. HBA testing strongly suggests a mediation by specific IgE in the increase of CD63 in BN rats. Thus, HBA test seems useful in assessing whether an experimental allergy was induced in animals genetically predisposed to an immune response, Th2-mediated, like BN rat. We also conclude that rat basophil activation does not participate in the histamine release during anaphylactic shock in sensitized BN rats.12640041
Aspergillus fumigatus conidia survive and germinate in acidic organelles of A549 epithelial cells.
Wasylnka Julie A, Moore Margo M
Journal of cell science
Aspergillus fumigatus is an environmental mould that can cause invasive disease in the immunocompromised host. Previous work has shown that conidia can be internalized by lung epithelial cells (A549) and murine macrophages (J774) in vitro. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the fate of A. fumigatus conidia within the endosomal network of these cells. Co-localization of conidia expressing green fluorescent protein with proteins present in the early endosomal (CD71) and lysosomal (CD63, LAMP-1) membrane was assessed using confocal microscopy. In J774 cells, 75% of internalized conidia were found in phagosomes containing LAMP-1 120 minutes post-infection. In A549 cells, 55% and 58% of internalized conidia were found to co-localize with LAMP-1 and CD63 by 24 hours. Cathepsin D also co-localized with internalized conidia in A549 cells. Phagosomes containing conidia were shown to be acidified in both cell types. Less than 1% of the initial inoculum survived in J774 cells by 12 hours post-infection. After 24 hours, 3% of internalized conidia survived in A549 cells and 34% of these had germinated. By 36 hours, the germlings were able to escape the phagosome and form extracellular hyphae without lysis of the host cell.12637702
Platelet function under aspirin, clopidogrel, and both after ischemic stroke: a case-crossover study.
Grau Armin J, Reiners Sven, Lichy Christoph, Buggle Florian, Ruf Andreas
Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation
Combined antiplatelet agents may offer additive protection over single drugs after stroke. We investigated whether platelet activation is reduced under combined aspirin and clopidogrel compared with each drug alone.
In a case-crossover study, 31 patients with previous atherothrombotic or lacunar stroke who were treated with aspirin (100 to 300 mg/d) received clopidogrel (75 mg/d) and both aspirin and clopidogrel for 4 weeks. Platelet function in whole blood was studied after each treatment period and in healthy control subjects to assess activation-dependent antigens CD62p and CD63 by flow cytometry and collagen/epinephrine (CEPI-CT) and collagen/ADP (CADP-CT) closure times with the platelet function analyzer PFA-100, which investigates platelet-related function under shear stress.
CD62p expression and CD63 expression were not different under the 3 treatment regimens. CD63 but not CD62p expression was lower in control subjects than in stroke patients regardless of the antiplatelet treatment (P<0.05). CEPI-CT was prolonged under aspirin and aspirin plus clopidogrel compared with clopidogrel monotherapy (P<0.0001). CADP-CT was longer under combination therapy than under aspirin (P=0.0009) or clopidogrel (P=0.0074) or in control subjects (P=0.0010), mainly because of strong prolongation in a patient subgroup (28%).
CD63 expression reflecting the release of platelet lysosomes is consistently increased after stroke and incompletely suppressed by treatment with aspirin, clopidogrel, or both. The strong prolongation of CADP-CT under combined aspirin and clopidogrel in a patient subgroup may indicate a lower risk of thrombosis but also a higher risk of hemorrhage. The predictive value of platelet activation parameters requires investigation in prospective studies.12622792
Accumulation of tyrosinase in the endolysosomal compartment is induced by U18666A.
Hall Andrea M, Krishnamoorthy Lalitha, Orlow Seth J
Pigment cell research / sponsored by the European Society for Pigment Cell Research and the International Pigment Cell Society
The 3beta-(2-diethylaminoethoxy)-androstenone HCl (U18666A), progesterone and several cationic amphiphilic drugs have been shown to alter the trafficking of a number of intracellular membrane proteins including CD63/Lamp-3, insulin growth factor 2/mannose 6-phosphate receptor (IGF2/MPR), and the Niemann-Pick C1 gene product (NPC1) as well as ganglioside GM1. We have examined the effects of these compounds on cultured melanocytes at concentrations that have been shown to effectively alter intracellular trafficking. Treatment of melanocytes with U18666A (2.5 micro M) or progesterone (15 micro M) for 96 h decreased melanin content an average of 67% as compared with control without lowering the total cellular tyrosinase activity. Steroidal alkaloids that preferentially act on the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway showed no related specificity in their ability to decrease pigmentation. In melanocytes treated with U18666A, tyrosinase accumulates in a compartment that contains both lysosome-associated membrane protein-1 (Lamp 1) and MPR, and stains with filipin, consistent with cholesterol-laden late endosomes/lysosomes. Our results suggest that tyrosinase, like the NPC1 gene product, traverses a U18666A-sensitive trafficking pathway.12621250
CD62 expression during thrombus formation.
Saving Kay L, Mankin Peggy E
Journal of pediatric hematology/oncology
A large right atrial mass was discovered in a 16-year-old female patient receiving chemotherapy treatment for Hodgkin disease. The patient was participating in a platelet function research study. During laboratory examination of platelet activation, increasing CD62 and CD63 expression were found to mirror the clot formation. Further investigation of platelet expression of CD62 and CD63 by flow cytometry might reveal it to be a valuable tool in predicting impending thrombus formation.12610138
Potential role for CD63 in CCR5-mediated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection of macrophages.
von Lindern Jana J, Rojo Daniel, Grovit-Ferbas Kathie, Yeramian Christine, Deng Cheng, Herbein Georges, Ferguson Monique R, Pappas Todd C, Decker Julie M, Singh Anjali, Collman Ronald G, O'Brien William A
Journal of virology
Macrophages and CD4(+) lymphocytes are the principal target cells for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection, but the molecular details of infection may differ between these cell types. During studies to identify cellular molecules that could be involved in macrophage infection, we observed inhibition of HIV-1 infection of macrophages by monoclonal antibody (MAb) to the tetraspan transmembrane glycoprotein CD63. Pretreatment of primary macrophages with anti-CD63 MAb, but not MAbs to other macrophage cell surface tetraspanins (CD9, CD81, and CD82), was shown to inhibit infection by several R5 and dualtropic strains, but not by X4 isolates. The block to productive infection was postfusion, as assessed by macrophage cell-cell fusion assays, but was prior to reverse transcription, as determined by quantitative PCR assay for new viral DNA formation. The inhibitory effects of anti-CD63 in primary macrophages could not be explained by changes in the levels of CD4, CCR5, or beta-chemokines. Infections of peripheral blood lymphocytes and certain cell lines were unaffected by treatment with anti-CD63, suggesting that the role of CD63 in HIV-1 infection may be specific for macrophages.12599177
Flow cytometry versus histamine release analysis of in vitro basophil degranulation in allergy to Hymenoptera venom.
Lambert C, Guilloux L, Dzviga C, Gourgaud-Massias C, Genin C
Cytometry. Part B, Clinical cytometry
Flow cytometry (FCM) has been proposed for specific allergy in vitro testing. We investigated its biological significance for allergy to Hymenoptera venoms and compared it with the routinely performed basophil histamine release test (HRT).
Blood samples from 26 allergic and 8 nonallergic donors were incubated with venom at serial concentrations. Basophils were analyzed with anti-CD45-PE-Cyanin 5, Anti-IgE-FITC, and Anti-CD63-Phycoerythrine. HRT was measured by radioimmunoassay.
FCM was as convenient as HRT for measuring basophil reactivity in at least 87% of allergic and 75% of nonallergic subjects. CD63 outer expression was specifically induced in 91% of releaser subjects (86% on HRT) and in 1 of 10 tests in nonallergic donors, or one of six tests (16% on HRT) in allergic patients tested with an irrelevant allergen. Both methods were concordant in 85.7% of the tests. The three discordant patients had low-grade reactions and borderline biological responses on FCM (n = 2) or HRT (n = 1).
The dynamic, physiologic significance of CD63, the dose-response curve, and dependency on ethylene-diaminetetra acetic acid suggested that both tests reflect the same mechanism.
Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.12591106
Effect of a single dose aspirin on platelets in humans with multiple risk factors for coronary artery disease.
Malinin Alex I, Atar Dan, Callahan Kevin P, McKenzie Marcus E, Serebruany Victor L
European journal of pharmacology
We sought to assess how one tablet of non-enteric coated aspirin (325 mg) affects human platelets in subjects with risk factors for coronary artery disease. Data from 63 individuals with multiple cardiac risk factors were analyzed. Platelets were assessed twice at baseline (pre-aspirin), and after 3-4 h (post-aspirin). We employed 5 microM epinephrine-induced conventional aggregometry, closure time with epinephrine/collagen cartridge by PFA-100(R) (Dade-Behring), and aspirin response units (ARU) stimulated by propyl gallat with Ultegra (Accumetrics, San Diego, CA, USA) for measuring platelet function. In addition, the expression of platelet receptors was determined by using the following monoclonal antibodies: anti-CD31, CD41, CD42b, CD51/CD61, CD62p, CD63, CD107a, and CD151. Platelet-leukocyte formation was detected utilizing dual antibodies for a pan-platelet marker CD151, and CD14, a monocyte/macrophage marker. PAC-1 was used to measure fibrinogen-platelet binding. One pill of aspirin significantly decreased platelet-rich plasma (PRP) aggregation (74.18+/-16.75% vs. 24.92+/-8.64%; p<0.0001) and resulted in reduction of the aspirin response units (ARU) (662.24+/-65.65 vs. 451.05+/-69.31; p<0.0001). There was also prolongation of the closure time (194.4+/-25.3 vs. 258.63+/-55.61 s; p<0.0001). High correlation (r(2)=0.73-0.86) between platelet analyzer readings and aggregation was observed. One tablet of aspirin moderately inhibited expression of most surface platelet receptors measured, and such inhibition reached significance (p<0.05) for PAC-1, CD31, CD41, CD42, CD62p, and CD151. We conclude that a single dose of aspirin affects major platelet receptors, presumably directly or indirectly through the inhibition of prostanoids via platelet cyclooxygenase-1 blockade. The Ultegra Analyzer with a novel cartridge seems to be reliable in reflecting aspirins' effects on platelets and could be used in the future in clinical practice for monitoring aspirin therapy.12587990
Influence of the diluent on the effect of highly diluted histamine on basophil activation.
Lorenz I, Schneider E M, Stolz P, Brack A, Strube J
Homeopathy : the journal of the Faculty of Homeopathy
In modern pharmaceutical practice, it is common to use purified ethanol and purified water for the preparation of homeopathic dilutions. Hahnemann in 1827 recommended good brandy as a diluent. Brandy contains a lot of accompanying substances in addition to ethanol.
The research question was whether different diluents influence the effectiveness of high dilutions, especially above Avogadro's number. We compared two dilution media to investigate the diluent's influence. Within the limitations of the test-system, the dilution media were as similar to good brandy as possible and like purified ethanol. Dilutions of histamine were prepared with both media. As test-system, we used modified basophil activation in an in vitro cell system. Basophils are activated by anti-immunoglobulin E (anti-IgE). The activation of basophils is inhibited by prior incubation with histamine. The reduction in activation was measured with different dilutions of histamine. The test system used a 3-colour flow cytometric method. The interleukin-3 (IL-3) receptor CD123 was used to identify basophils in the leukocyte mixture. The CD63 surface marker was used for quantification of activated basophils.
With higher concentrations of histamine, we observed inhibition on optimally anti-IgE-stimulated basophil activation with a clear concentration dependency. With low concentrations of histamine (up to 10(-31)), we also observed inhibition of IgE-mediated basophil activation. Differences were observed between the dilution media.
The preliminary results support the hypothesis that the dilution medium may influence the effects of high dilutions. This could be of importance for homeopathic pharmaceutical practice as well as for ultra-high dilution experiments. The refined basophil test system proved to be highly sensitive and reliable. Further studies are needed.12581566
Monocyte-derived microparticles may be a sign of vascular complication in patients with lung cancer.
Kanazawa Shigenori, Nomura Shosaku, Kuwana Midori, Muramatsu Mikiko, Yamaguchi Kazuyuki, Fukuhara Shirou
Lung cancer (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
We measured and compared the levels of plasma monocyte-derived microparticles (MDMP) and platelet activation markers [plasma platelet-derived microparticles (PDMP), CD62P binding to platelets; plt-CD62P, CD63 binding to platelets; plt-CD63], to develop a better understanding of their potential contribution to vascular complications of lung cancer. The concentrations of MDMP and PDMP in lung cancer patients were significantly higher (P < 0.01) than those in normal subjects. Levels of plt-CD62P and plt-CD63 were significantly higher (P < 0.001 for each) in lung cancer patients than in controls. Levels of sE-selectin were also higher in lung cancer patients than in control subjects. MDMP correlated positively with plt-CD62P, plt-CD63, and PDMP with its relation to PDMP being particularly significant. The number of MDMPs and PDMPs are patients who are non-small cell lung cancer were significantly higher than that in small cell lung cancer patients. In addition, levels of sE-selectin were higher in non-small cell lung cancer than in small cell lung cancer patients. These findings suggest that elevated MDMPs may be a sign of vascular complication in lung cancer patients, particularly those who suffer from non-small cell lung cancer.
Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.12581191
Initial exposed phosphatidylserine levels correlate with cellular response to cytotoxic drugs.
Drucker Liat, Ciobotaro Pnina, Kimchi Oded, Tohami Tali, Yarkoni Shai, Radnay Judith, Shapira Hava, Lishner Michael
European journal of haematology
Phosphatidylserine's (PS) membranal distribution is associated with an expanding variety of biological processes. We studied the relevance of preliminarily exposed membranal PS levels to cellular effects of cytotoxic agents. PBL of normal controls (n = 18) and patients with doxorubicin-treated breast carcinoma (n = 27) or 5'-fluorouracil-treated colorectal cancer (n = 32) were assayed before and after drug infusion. Membranal expression levels of PS, adhesion molecules (CD18, CD11a-c, CD63) and Fas-R of leukocyte subtypes were assessed by flow cytometer. Statistical analysis was implemented. Our results demonstrate external expression of PS on all leukocyte subpopulations despite non-apoptotic light scatter characteristics. Several distinct features were observed of which the more prominent were: leukocyte subtypes each display characteristic PS levels; cancer patients' PBL display higher preliminary PS levels than normal controls in all cell groups; and existence of negative correlations between initial membranal PS levels and drug-induced changes in its expression. Our findings underscore the complex involvement of PS in PBL apoptosis and possibly drug resistance.12580976
Hemolink, an o-raffinose cross-linked haemoglobin-based oxygen carrier, does not affect activation and function of human platelets in whole blood in vitro.
Leytin Valery, Mazer David, Mody Meera, Garvey Bernadette, Freedman John
British journal of haematology
Haemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) are anticipated to be safe and efficient alternatives to RBC transfusions. Haemoglobin (Hb) raffimer (Hemolink; Hemosol, Toronto, ON, Canada) is polymerized human Hb, cross-linked with o-raffinose. As administration of cell-free Hb may affect blood cells and tissues, this study was focused on evaluating effects of Hb raffimer on human platelets in whole blood in vitro. Citrated blood from healthy donors was incubated with Hb raffimer to achieve raffimer concentrations of 2-50 vol percentage (2-50 g/l). Platelet activation, phosphatidylserine exposure and microparticle generation were measured by flow cytometry. Aperture closure time on collagen/ADP- and collagen/epinephrine-coated membranes was determined by a platelet function analyser (PFA-100). We found that addition of Hb raffimer to blood samples up to 50 vol % did not affect human platelets as measured by various markers of platelet activation (CD42b, CD41, PAC-1, CD62, CD63), procoagulant activity (annexin V) and microparticle formation; differences between Hb raffimer- and lactated Ringer's-diluted blood were not significant. Similarly, no adverse effect of Hb raffimer on closure time was observed at concentrations up to 50 vol %, in comparison with Ringer's solution. These data indicate that exposure of human blood to high concentrations of Hb raffimer in vitro did not cause platelet activation nor affect platelet function.12580920
Marked improvement of the basophil activation test by detecting CD203c instead of CD63.
Boumiza R, Monneret G, Forissier M-F, Savoye J, Gutowski M-C, Powell W S, Bienvenu J
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
The flow cytometric basophil activation test by detection of CD63 expression has been developed as an alternative method for in vitro diagnosis of IgE-mediated reactions to various allergens. Despite promising initial studies, the test remains disappointing in terms of sensitivity. CD203c has recently been demonstrated as a specific activation marker of basophils that is rapidly up-regulated after allergen challenge in sensitized patients.
The goal of the present study was to compare basophil activation tests by using either CD203c or CD63 in the diagnosis of immediate-type allergy to latex.
Twenty-seven patients (health care workers of our institution) who developed clinical features evocative of allergy after contact with latex were included and classified into two groups. Group 1 (n = 16) comprised true allergic patients who presented with typical signs of immediate allergic reaction associated with a positive skin test (prick test). Group 2 (n = 11) consisted of patients whose clinical history was not typical and had negative skin test. Twelve healthy subjects were also studied as controls. We compared the sensitivity of two triple-staining flow cytometric protocols measuring basophil activation after latex stimulation: CD45-IgE-CD63 and CD45-IgE-CD203c.
The CD203c protocol showed a higher sensitivity than the CD63 protocol (75% vs. 50%). In comparison, latex-specific IgE sensitivity was found to be 69%. Furthermore, the magnitude of the basophil response was significantly higher with CD203c in comparison with CD63. Specificity was 100% for both protocols.
Due to superior gating of basophils and a higher range of activation in response to allergen, the basophil activation test is markedly improved by use of CD203c instead of CD63.12579280
Expression of tetraspanin adaptor proteins below defined threshold values is associated with in vitro invasiveness of mammary carcinoma cells.
Sauer Georg, Kurzeder Christian, Grundmann Regina, Kreienberg Rolf, Zeillinger Robert, Deissler Helmut
Oncology reports
Tetraspanins are transmembrane adaptor proteins involved in the regulation of various fundamental cellular processes. For a number of malignant diseases, the level of expression of members of the tetraspanin family was found to correlate with tumor cell invasiveness, ability to form metastases, and poor clinical outcome. We describe the exact quantification of mRNAs coding for the tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD82 and CD151 expressed by mammary carcinoma-derived cell lines that were classified as invasive or non-invasive according to their ability to penetrate collagen-fibroblast gels in vitro. The mean of beta2-microglobulin-normalized expression of CD9 was about 10-fold higher than the mean calculated for CD63 and about 20-fold higher than expression of CD82 and CD151. Direct comparison of tetraspanin expression of invasive and non-invasive cell lines with the Mann-Whitney test revealed a significant correlation for CD63. Grouping of cell lines in relation to threshold values of expression resulted in significant correlations for CD63 (Fisher's exact test p=0.004) and CD151 (p=0.02) but not for CD82 (p=0.065) and CD9 (p=0.168). Expression of CD9, C63 and CD151 was found to be coupled whereas CD82 was expressed independently. This highly significant association points to common mechanisms of gene regulation for this subgroup of tetraspanins. We showed that on basis of absolute amounts of tetraspanin mRNAs, at least in vitro invasiveness is clearly predictable. Our results support the assumption that downregulation of tetraspanins in breast cancer cells is an important step of tumor progression to more malignant phenotypes and underline their important role as mediators in multimolecular membrane protein complexes regulating cell adhesion and migration.12578603
[The Examination Method of Glycoprotein CD62P and CD63 on Platelet Membrane and Their Expression in Adults Patients with Diabetes Mellitus]
Zhai Zhi-Min, Dai Hai-Ming, Wu Jing-Sheng, Mo Wei-Ling, Li Su-Mei
Zhongguo shi yan xue ye xue za zhi / Zhongguo bing li sheng li xue hui = Journal of experimental hematology / Chinese Association of Pathophysiology
To study the optimal examination method of CD62P and CD63 and investigate platelet activation in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), whole blood labeled directly with monoclonal antibodies CD62P and CD63 and flow cytometry were used to evaluate the positive percentages and the mean fluorescence intensity of CD62P and CD63. The specimens of peripheral blood obtained from 10 healthy adults were divided into two groups. In the unfixing group, the positive percentages of CD62P and CD63 at the periods of 30, 60, 90 and 120 minutes after staining were (7.57 +/- 2.33)%, (20.50 +/- 5.70)%, (28.70 +/- 5.67)% and (36.52 +/- 6.13)%, and, (0.89 +/- 0.36)%, (1.11 +/- 0.84)%, (2.35 +/- 2.02)% and (5.43 +/- 3.66)% respectively, their respective MFI were 1.57 +/- 0.13, 1.88 +/- 0.08, 2.00 +/- 0.09 and 2.38 +/- 0.22 and 3.91 +/- 0.11, 4.07 +/- 0.16, 4.38 +/- 0.14 and 4.44 +/- 0.19. However, in fixing group with 1% paraformaldehyde, the results had not any obvious change and almost were same. Besides it, the positive percentages of CD62P and CD63 in 37 adult patients with DM were (14.11 +/- 6.68)% and (2.71 +/- 1.74)%, significantly higher than that in the normal controls. It is concluded that the CD62P and CD63 on platelet membrane were very sensitive and would be easily activated in vitro, all manipulations that includes labeling with antibody, incubation and detection using flow cytometry should be finished within 30 minutes after samples collected. While fixing by using 1% paraformaldehyde can steady the labeling compounds and effectively prevent the artificial activation of platelet, and keep the stable results within two hours after the samples labeled. In adult patients with DM, the relationship between the cardiovascular complication of diabetes and platelet activation might be existed.12577374
[Effect of Puerarin on platelet activating factors CD63 and CD62P, plasminogen activator inhibitor and C-reactive protein in patients with unstable angia pectoris].
Luo Z R, Zheng B
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban
To explore the action of platelet surface activity protein (platelet granule membrane protein CD63 and lysosome membrane protein CD62P), plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) and C-reactive protein (C-RP) in occurrence and development of unstable angina pectoris (UAP), and the effect of Puerarin on them.
Patients with UAP were randomly divided into the treated group (32 cases, treated with Puerarin) and the control group (27 cases, treated with Ticlid), the therapeutic course was 4 weeks for both groups. Changes of CD63, CD62P, PAI-1 and C-RP before and after treatment were observed.
The levels of CD63, CD62P, PAI-1 and C-RP were higher in UAP patients than those in normal subjects and in the patients with stable angina pectoris (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01). These parameters were increased along with the aggravating of patients in Braunwald's degree. After 4-week treatment, the above-mentioned parameters lowered in both groups (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01), and comparison between the two groups showed no significant difference statistically.
Platelet activation, plasminogen activator and C-RP play important roles in the occurrence and development of UAP. The obvious effect of Puerarin in anti-platelet activation, improving plasminogen activator and relieving inflammatory reaction was of great importance in preventing the occurrence and development of acute coronary syndrome clinically.12576733
Flow-cytometric cellular allergen stimulation test in latex allergy.
Sanz María L, Gamboa Pedro M, García-Avilés Carmen, Vila Leticia, Diéguez Isauro, Antépara Ignacio, de Weck Alain L
International archives of allergy and immunology
The use of flow-cytometric basophil activation to different allergens has been recommended in recent years. In this study, we analyzed the diagnostic reliability of the flow-cytometric allergen stimulation test (FAST) after latex-specific stimulation in vitro. The diagnostic reliability of the technique was assessed as well as its correlation with other in vitro diagnostic parameters.
43 patients allergic to latex with a positive history and skin test participated in the study. Thirty subjects (20 of them exposed to latex) with a negative history, skin tests and serum-specific IgE determination to latex were used as controls. In FAST the percentage of basophils that express CD63 as an activation marker after in vitro stimulation with allergen (latex) is determined by flow cytometry, following double labelling with the monoclonal antibodies anti-CD63-PE and anti-IgE FITC.
Intraclass correlation coefficient in FAST with latex was 0.995 (p < 0.0001), which demonstrates the excellent reproducibility of this technique. Taking a cutoff point of 10% by means of ROC curves, FAST yields a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 100%. The FAST positive predictive value in latex allergy was 100% and the negative predictive value was 99.9%. We found a positive and significant correlation between FAST and specific IgE (CAP) with the histamine release test and specific sulphidoleukotriene production [cellular allergen stimulation test (CAST); p < 0.05].
FAST is a highly reliable technique (93% sensitivity and 100% specificity) in the in vitro diagnosis of IgE-mediated latex allergy.
Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel12575572
[Clinical study on relationship of CD62p, CD63 and TSP to the qi-stagnation induced blood-stasis syndrome and qi-deficiency induced blood-stasis syndrome in aged patients].
Kong L J, Li L Y, Tang Z F
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban
To observe the relationship of platelet activation to the Qi-stagnation induced blood-stasis (QSBS) or Qi-deficiency induced blood-stasis (QDBS) syndrome.
Expressions of platelet activating molecules, including alpha-granule membrane glycoprotein (CD62p), lysosomal integral membrane protein (CD63) and thrombospondin (TSP), in patients with QSBS and QDBS were determined quantitatively with flow-cytometry and specific monoclonal antibody against activated platelet. And platelet aggregation was tested simultaneously.
CD62p, CD63 and TSP expressions in Blood-Stasis patients, both QSBS and QDBS, were higher than those in the normal control significantly (all P < 0.01); all the three expressions were higher in QSBS group than those in QDBS group (all P < 0.01), Positive correlation was shown between CD62p and CD63 (r = 0.740, P < 0.01), CD62p and TSP (r = 0.744, P < 0.01), TSP and CD63 (r = 0.635, P < 0.01), and between CD62p and ADP induced platelet aggregation (r = 0.715, P < 0.01).
Platelet activation was involved in the pathogenesis and development of Blood-Stasis Syndrome, especially closely related with the QSBS Syndrome.12569360
Expression of tetraspanins in human lung cancer cells: frequent downregulation of CD9 and its contribution to cell motility in small cell lung cancer.
Funakoshi Toshiki, Tachibana Isao, Hoshida Yoshihiko, Kimura Hiromi, Takeda Yoshito, Kijima Takashi, Nishino Kazumi, Goto Hiroyuki, Yoneda Tsutomu, Kumagai Toru, Osaki Tadashi, Hayashi Seiji, Aozasa Katsuyuki, Kawase Ichiro
Oncogene
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) invades locally and metastasizes distantly extremely early when compared with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The underlying molecular mechanisms, however, have not been elucidated. Accumulating evidence suggests that downregulation of several members of tetraspanins is associated with progression of solid tumors, thus indicating poor prognosis. Here we screened 30 lung cancer cell lines for expression of tetraspanins, CD9, CD63, CD81, CD82, CD151, and NAG-2. Flow cytometry revealed that, among these proteins, CD9 is broadly expressed in NSCLC lines, but is absent or highly reduced in most SCLC lines (P<0.0001). Using the Boyden chamber and videomicroscopic cell motility assays, we showed that stable transfection of CD9 into an SCLC line, OS3-R5, reduced cell motility on fibronectin. Furthermore, by transient transfection of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged CD9 into three other SCLC lines, we observed that SCLC cells expressing GFP-CD9 were uniformly less motile than untransfected cells. CD9 or GFP-CD9 was associated with beta1 integrins and distributed at the tumor cell periphery and cell-cell contacts, suggesting that CD9 modifies beta1 integrin function to reduce motility. These findings suggest that low expression of CD9 may contribute to the highly invasive and metastatic phenotype of SCLC.12538769
Deletion of exon 4 from human surfactant protein C results in aggresome formation and generation of a dominant negative.
Wang Wen-Jing, Mulugeta Surafel, Russo Scott J, Beers Michael F
Journal of cell science
Human surfactant protein C (hSP-C) is synthesized by the alveolar type 2 cell as a 197 amino acid integral membrane proprotein and proteolytically processed to a secreted 3.7 kDa mature form. Although the SP-C null mouse possesses a non-lethal phenotype, a heterozygous substitution of A for G in the first base of intron 4 of the human SP-C gene (c.460+1A>G) has been reported in association with familial interstitial lung disease and absence of mature protein. This mutation produces a splice deletion of exon 4 (deltaExon4) resulting in removal of a positionally conserved cysteine in the C-terminal flanking propeptide. Based on a prior study showing that an identical deletion in the rat isoform diverted mutant protein to stable aggregates, we hypothesized that expression of the deltaExon4 mutation would result in disruption of intracellular trafficking of both mutant and wild-type proSP-C. We tested this in vitro using fusion proteins of EGFP conjugated either to wild-type SP-C (EGFP/hSP-C(1-197)) or to SP-C deleted of Exon4 (EGFP/hSP-C(deltaExon4)). Fluorescence microscopy showed that EGFP/hSP-C(1-197) transfected into A549 cells was expressed in a punctuate pattern in CD63 (+) cytoplasmic vesicles, whereas EGFP/hSP-C(deltaExon4) accumulated in ubiquitinated perinuclear inclusions linked to the microtubule organizing center. A similar juxtanuclear pattern was observed following transfection of SP-C cDNA lacking only cysteine residues in the C-terminal propeptide encoded by Exon 4 (EGFP/hSP-C(C120/121G)). To evaluate whether mutant proSP-C could function as a dominant negative, EGFP/hSP-C(deltaExon4) was cotransfected with HA-tagged hSP-C(1-197) and resulted in the restriction of both forms to perinuclear compartments. Addition of Na(+) 4-phenylbutyrate, a facilitator of trafficking of other misfolded proteins, attenuated the aggregation of EGFP/hSP-C(deltaExon4). We conclude that c.460+1A>G mutation of human SP-C results in disruption of disulfide-mediated folding encoded by Exon 4 leading to diversion of unprocessed proSP-C to aggresomes. The heterotypic oligomerization of hSP-C(1-197) and hSP-C(deltaExon4) provides a molecular mechanism for the dominant-negative effect observed in vivo.12526922
Megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line MOLM-16 derived from minimally differentiated acute leukemia with myeloid/NK precursor phenotype.
Matsuo Yoshinobu, Drexler Hans G, Kaneda Kinuyo, Kojima Kensuke, Ohtsuki Yuji, Hara Masamichi, Yasukawa Masaki, Tanimoto Mitsune, Orita Kunzo
Leukemia research
The megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line MOLM-16 was established at relapse from the peripheral blood of a 77-year-old Japanese woman with minimally differentiated acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M0). Immunophenotyping of the fresh leukemic cells revealed a myeloid/NK precursor phenotype being positive for CD7, CD13, CD33, CD34, and CD56. In addition, megakaryocyte-associated antigens CD41 and CD61 were found to be positive. The established cell line designated MOLM-16 was proliferatively responsive to the treatment with various cytokines including EPO, GM-CSF, IL-3, PIXY-321, and TPO. MOLM-16 revealed characteristics of the megakaryocytic lineage in terms of immunophenotyping being positive for CD9, CD31, CD36, CD41, CD61, CD62P, CD63, CD110, CD151, thrombospondin, von Willebrand factor (vWf), and fibrinogen. Electron microscopic analysis showed positivity for ultrastructural platelet peroxidase in the nuclear envelope. The karyotype analysis of MOLM-16 revealed various numerical and structural abnormalities including t(6;8)(q21;q24.3), t(9;18)(q13;q21) and marker chromosomes. The extensive immunological, cytogenetic and functional characterization of MOLM-16 suggests that this cell line may represent a scientifically significant in vitro model which could facilitate the evaluation of megakaryocytic differentiation.12517971
Role of vesicle-associated membrane protein-2, through Q-soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor/R-soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor interaction, in the exocytosis of specific and tertiary granules of human neutrophils.
Mollinedo Faustino, Martín-Martín Belén, Calafat Jero, Nabokina Svetlana M, Lazo Pedro A
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
We have examined the role of the R-soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) synaptobrevin-2/vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP)-2 in neutrophil exocytosis. VAMP-2, localized in the membranes of specific and gelatinase-containing tertiary granules in resting human neutrophils, resulted translocated to the cell surface following neutrophil activation under experimental conditions that induced exocytosis of specific and tertiary granules. VAMP-2 was also found on the external membrane region of granules docking to the plasma membrane in activated neutrophils. Specific Abs against VAMP-2 inhibited Ca(2+) and GTP-gamma-S-induced exocytosis of CD66b-enriched specific and tertiary granules, but did not affect exocytosis of CD63-enriched azurophilic granules, in electropermeabilized neutrophils. Tetanus toxin disrupted VAMP-2 and inhibited exocytosis of tertiary and specific granules. Activation of neutrophils led to the interaction of VAMP-2 with the plasma membrane Q-SNARE syntaxin 4, and anti-syntaxin 4 Abs inhibited exocytosis of specific and tertiary granules in electropermeabilized neutrophils. Immunoelectron microscopy showed syntaxin 4 on the plasma membrane contacting with docked granules in activated neutrophils. These data indicate that VAMP-2 mediates exocytosis of specific and tertiary granules, and that Q-SNARE/R-SNARE complexes containing VAMP-2 and syntaxin 4 are involved in neutrophil exocytosis.12483072
Sepsis- and endotoxemia-generated cytokines do not trigger activation of human platelets.
Leytin Valery, Shakoor Samantha, Mody Meera, Allen David, Garvey Bernadette, Freedman John
Critical care medicine
To analyze the effect of cytokines generated in sepsis and endotoxemia (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-alpha and interleukins [IL]-1beta, -6, and -8) on activation of human platelets and to study the effect of cytokines on platelet activation in the presence of alpha-thrombin, a potent inducer of coagulation and platelet activation generated in sepsis and endotoxemia.
flow cytometric study of platelet activation induced by cytokines and/or thrombin in the whole blood and platelet-rich plasma (PRP) of healthy volunteers.
Research laboratory in a Canadian hospital.
Nine healthy volunteers recruited from laboratory staff.
Venous blood samples were obtained into acid-citrate-dextrose anticoagulant. Whole blood and PRP were diluted with appropriate buffer optimized for analyzing platelet activation by flow cytometry. TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, and IL-8 were added to blood or PRP in concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 ng/mL and incubated for 15 mins at 37 degrees C in the presence or absence of a submaximal concentration of human alpha-thrombin (0.025 units/mL). Samples were stained with fluorescent antibodies against markers of platelet activation (P-selectin [CD62], lysosomal protein [CD63], and fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor receptors [CD41 and CD42b, respectively]) and analyzed by flow cytometry. The data obtained show that none of these cytokines trigger activation of resting platelets in whole blood or PRP and do not modulate the effect of thrombin on platelet activation as measured by quantitation of CD62, CD63, and CD42b markers on the platelet surface.
Cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, and IL-8, which are extensively produced in sepsis and endotoxemia, do not trigger activation of resting human platelets directly or indirectly by mediating processes in white or red blood cells. The cytokines did not affect thrombin-induced platelet activation.12480921
Complementary DNA arrays identify CD63 tetraspanin and alpha3 integrin chain as differentially expressed in low and high metastatic human colon carcinoma cells.
Sordat Isabelle, Decraene Charles, Silvestre Timothée, Petermann Olivier, Auffray Charles, Piétu Geneviève, Sordat Bernard
Laboratory investigation; a journal of technical methods and pathology
SUMMARY: Malignant tumor cell invasion is determinant for metastasis to occur. E2 and C5 colon carcinoma cells that were derived from the parental Lovo line and that differ experimentally in spontaneous metastatic ability have been monitored for gene expression by cDNA arrays. Among genes found differentially expressed, the CD63 tetraspanin, not previously recognized in colon cancer progression, and the alpha3 integrin chain were both up-regulated in low metastatic E2 cells and were analyzed for their functional role using adhesion, migration, and invasion assays. Cell surface expression of CD63 and alpha3 integrin was about 2-fold higher in E2 than in C5 cells and confocal microscopy showed that CD63 and alpha3 integrin colocalized evenly on C5 cells whereas they concentrated at elongated tips of the low-metastatic more substrate-adhesive E2 cells. Antibody-interference experiments identified laminin-5 (LN-5) as a ligand interacting with the alpha3beta1/CD63 complex. Substrate-immobilized anti-CD63 antibodies enhanced tumor cell migration and invasion and induced prominent cell surface protrusions that were repressed by the PI3-kinase LY294002 inhibitor. Our results suggest that changes in the expression of surface CD63 and alpha3beta1 integrin interacting with LN-5 could affect migratory signals and the progression of the metastatic disease.12472671
Analysis of gene expression during maturation of immature dendritic cells derived from peripheral blood monocytes.
Matsunaga T, Ishida T, Takekawa M, Nishimura S, Adachi M, Imai K
Scandinavian journal of immunology
Dendritic cells (DCs) are the most important antigen-presenting cells. Many recent studies have compared the function of immature DCs (iDCs) and mature DCs (mDCs), but there have been few reports of the molecular changes that occur in DCs during maturation. Here, we report on differential gene expression in iDCs generated from peripheral blood monocytes compared with mDCs. Gene expression was evaluated using the differential display method after activation of iDCs with a low concentration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to induce maturation. Proteasome subunit alpha type 3 (PSMA3), transcription factor EC (TFEC) isoform and BTK region clone 2f10-rpi were transiently upregulated. Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase and CD63 antigen were upregulated for at least 24 h. Neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP) and transforming growth factor-beta-induced 68 kDa protein were downregulated. This is the first report of NAIP expression in human DCs. By comparing the expression of NAIP with that of other members of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family and the Bcl-2 family, only NAIP was found to be strongly expressed in iDCs before stimulation by LPS. PSMA3 was also induced in the DCs stimulated with immune complex. These findings might contribute to our understanding of DC maturation and the effectiveness of DC-based vaccines.12459668
Conventional mechanical ventilation is associated with bronchoalveolar lavage-induced activation of polymorphonuclear leukocytes: a possible mechanism to explain the systemic consequences of ventilator-induced lung injury in patients with ARDS.
Zhang Haibo, Downey Gregory P, Suter Peter M, Slutsky Arthur S, Ranieri V Marco
Anesthesiology
Protective ventilatory strategies have resulted in a decreased mortality rate in acute respiratory distress syndrome, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. The authors hypothesized that (1) mechanical ventilation modulates activation of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), (2) the consequent release of proteinases is correlated with a systemic inflammatory response and with multiple organ dysfunction, and (3) these deleterious effects can be minimized by a protective ventilatory strategy.
Human PMNs were incubated with bronchoalveolar lavage fluid obtained from patients at entry or 36 h after randomization to ventilation with either a conventional (control) or a lung-protective strategy. PMN oxidant production and surface expression of adhesion molecules and granule markers, including CD18, CD63, and L-selectin, were measured by flow cytometry. Extracellular elastase activity was quantified using a fluorescent substrate.
Bronchoalveolar lavage obtained from both groups of patients at entry showed similar effects on PMN oxidant production and expression of surface markers. At 36 h, exposure of PMNs to bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from the control group resulted in increased PMN activation as manifested by a significant increase in oxidant production, CD18, and CD63 surface expression, and shedding of L-selectin. By contrast, these variables were unchanged at 36 h in the lung-protective group. There was a significant correlation between the changes of the variables and changes in interleukin-6 level and the number of failing organs.
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes can be activated by mechanical ventilation, and the consequent release of elastase was correlated with the degree of systemic inflammatory response and multiple organ failure. This result may possibly explain the decreased mortality in acute respiratory distress syndrome patients treated with a lung-protective strategy.12445271
Clustering of MHC-peptide complexes prior to their engagement in the immunological synapse: lipid raft and tetraspan microdomains.
Vogt Anne B, Spindeldreher Sebastian, Kropshofer Harald
Immunological reviews
Protein reorganization at the interface of a T cell and an antigen-presenting cell (APC) plays an important role in T cell activation. Imaging techniques reveal that reorganization of particular receptor-ligand pairs gives rise to an intercellular junction, termed the immunological synapse. In this synapse antigenic peptides associated with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules form multimolecular arrays on the APC side, engaging an equivalent number of clustered T cell receptors (TCRs) on the T cell. The accumulation of MHC molecules carrying cognate peptide in the APC-T cell interface was thought to depend on the specificity and presence of TCRs. Recent evidence, however, suggests that the APC is equipped to preorganize MHC-peptide complexes in the absence of T cells. To this end, MHC molecules become incorporated into two types of membrane microdomains: (i) cholesterol- and glycosphingolipid-enriched domains, denoted lipid rafts, that preconcentrate MHC class II molecules; and (ii) microdomains made up of tetraspan proteins, such as CD9, CD63, CD81 or CD82, that mediate enrichment of MHC class II molecules loaded with a select set of peptides. It follows that the integrity, composition and dynamics of these microdomains are candidate determinants favoring activation or silencing of T cells.12444039
Temporal and spatial patterns of ovarian gene transcription following an ovulatory dose of gonadotropin in the rat.
Espey Lawrence L, Richards JoAnne S
Biology of reproduction
In recent years, there have been a number of efforts to identify genes that are expressed in mature ovarian follicles in response to an ovulatory dose of LH or its homologue hCG. This review keys on 20 ovulation-specific genes that we have identified by the molecular procedure known as differential display. The objective is to use this sampling of genes to illustrate the diversity in the temporal and spatial patterns of expression of genes in the ovary following the stimulus of this gonadal target tissue by a single glycoprotein hormone. The specific genes that are surveyed include 5-aminolevulinate synthase; early growth response protein-1; gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase; cyclooxygenase-2; epiregulin; pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide; tumor necrosis factor-stimulated gene-6; regulator of G-protein signaling protein-2; adrenodoxin; steroidogenic acute regulatory protein; 3alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; CD63, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs; tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1; carbonyl reductase, a G-protein-coupled receptor; pancreatitis-associated protein-III; glutathione S-transferase; and metallothionein-1. The ovulatory expression of these different genes is predominantly within the granulosa layer of mature follicles. However, there were also instances of expression in the thecal and stromal tissue of the ovary, as well as in vascular endothelial cells and in luteal tissue. The overwhelming impression is that the molecular events of ovulation are far more complex, and therefore more highly ordered, than originally imagined.12429719
The presence of stomatin in detergent-insoluble domains of neutrophil granule membranes.
Feuk-Lagerstedt Elisabeth, Samuelsson Marie, Mosgoeller Wilhelm, Movitz Charlotta, Rosqvist Asa, Bergström Jörgen, Larsson Thomas, Steiner Marianne, Prohaska Rainer, Karlsson Anna
Journal of leukocyte biology
Neutrophil azurophil granules, traditionally regarded as the neutrophil counterpart to lysosomes, lack the lysosomal marker lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein and have recently been suggested to be nonlysosomal secretory organelles. The membrane of the azurophil granules is poorly characterized-CD63 and CD68 are the only membrane proteins identified so far. Here, azurophil granule membranes were isolated by Percoll gradient subcellular fractionation. Using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight mass spectrometry of tryptic peptides from an isolated protein, stomatin was identified in these membranes. Using immunoelectron microscopy and immunoblot analysis of isolated organelles, stomatin was found to be subcellularly localized, not only to the azurophil granules but also by a major part to the specific granules and by a minor part to the secretory vesicles/plasma membrane. We also show the presence of detergent-insoluble, low-density membrane domains in the plasma membrane and the granule membranes and found stomatin to be localized to these domains.12411644
Course of platelet activation markers after ischemic stroke.
Marquardt Lars, Ruf Andreas, Mansmann Ulrich, Winter Ralph, Schuler Matthias, Buggle Florian, Mayer Horst, Grau Armin J
Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation
The aim of this study was to evaluate the time course of platelet activation after ischemic stroke and to investigate whether platelet activation and inflammation are correlated with each other.
We serially determined expression of p-selectin (CD62p) and lysosome-associated membrane protein (CD63) by platelets using flow cytometry at 10 time points between days 1 and 90 in patients after ischemic stroke (n=50), in healthy subjects (n=30), and in risk factor control subjects (n=20). Furthermore, we correlated leukocyte count, C-reactive protein, and fibrinogen levels with platelet activation markers.
CD62p and CD63 expression was higher on day 1 after stroke than in both control groups (P<0.005 for both). CD62p expression rapidly declined, whereas CD63 expression remained significantly elevated until day 90. Stroke severity and different medication for secondary stroke prevention did not influence CD62p or CD63 expression. Platelet activation markers and inflammatory parameters were not correlated with each other at any time point after stroke.
The initial increase in both CD62p and CD63 expression by platelets is followed by a differential regulation of both parameters after stroke. The rapid decrease in CD62p expression may be caused by shedding from the cell surface. Its persistent elevation makes CD63 a good candidate for studies on predictors for stroke recurrence. Our findings suggest that the expression of CD62p and CD63 by platelets is regulated independently from inflammatory indexes.12399140
Elevated expression of integrin alpha(IIb) beta(IIIa) in drug-naïve, first-episode schizophrenic patients.
Walsh Marie Thérèse, Ryan Martina, Hillmann Andrew, Condren Rita, Kenny Dermot, Dinan Timothy, Thakore Jogin H
Biological psychiatry
Patients with schizophrenia have an increased risk over the general public of developing cardiovascular illness. It is unknown if there are functional changes in platelet surface receptors in schizophrenia. We therefore analyzed the surface expression of glycoprotein (GP)Ib, the integrin receptor alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa), CD62 (P-selectin), and CD63, and investigated platelet function in schizophrenic patients compared with healthy volunteers.
Nineteen drug-naive, first-episode patients with a DSM IV diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia were compared with matched healthy controls. Flow cytometry was used to assess platelet surface expression levels of GPIb, alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa), CD62, and CD63. Adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation was assayed.
The schizophrenic patients had a significantly (p < .0001) increased number of 68,145 +/- 8,260.1 alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa) receptors, platelet compared with 56,235 +/- 8,079.4 receptors, platelet in healthy controls.
Patients with schizophrenia have increased platelet expression of alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa), which may contribute to their increased risk of cardiovascular illness compared with the general population.12392323
Immunophenotypic analysis of human spleen compartments.
Korkusuz Petek, Dağdeviren A, Aşan E
Annals of anatomy = Anatomischer Anzeiger : official organ of the Anatomische Gesellschaft
Microanatomical compartments of the human spleen are yet under evaluation as most of the present information comes from experiments on animals with different anatomical structures. Immune staining of stromal and blood-born cells by cell surface antigens facilitates the differentiation of functional microanatomical compartmentalization of immune organs, including the spleen. Twenty-two specimens from healthy adult subjects with the average age of 35.6 +/- 13.8 (Range 17 to 58) years were included in this study. Monoclonal antibodies used in this study were supplied from the 5th, 6th and 7th International Workshops and Conferences on Human Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens. Tetraspan antigens presented a rather unique staining pattern in the human spleen, suggesting special roles for each (CD9, CD53, CD63, CD151 and CD231) in certain locations. Sinus lining cells presented a distinctive antigenic profile, sharing both endothelial cell (CD31, CD36, CD54, CD62P, CD102, CD105, CD106 and CD146) and macrophage lineage characteristics. The sheathed capillaries were not restricted to the perifollicular zone alone. Extracellular matrix receptors (CD49 a, CD49 b, CD49 c, CD49 e, CD49f, CD29 and CD44) stained the penicillary arterioles and vascular smooth muscle. These molecules were also found on the vascular endothelium. Leukocyte antigens (CD11a, CD11b, CD22, CD43, CD45, CD45RB, CD45RO and CD50) were mainly expressed in the white and red pulp of the spleen at different intensities, excluding the penicillary arterioles. Activation antigens (CD26, CD71 and CD98) presented a diffuse and broad staining pattern. In conclusion, microanatomical compartmentalization, microcirculation and function of the human spleen were evaluated using a wide panel of monoclonal antibodies.12388097
Nerve-mast cell (RBL) interaction: RBL membrane ruffling occurs at the contact site with an activated neurite.
Mori N, Suzuki R, Furuno T, McKay D M, Wada M, Teshima R, Bienenstock J, Nakanishi M
American journal of physiology. Cell physiology
Mast cell-neurite interaction serves as a model for neuroimmune interaction. We have shown that neurite-mast cell communication can occur via substance P interacting with neurokinin (NK)-1 receptors on the mucosal mast cell-like cell, the rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cell. Neurite (murine superior cervical ganglia) and RBL cell [expressing the granule-associated antigen CD63-green fluorescent protein (GFP) conjugate] cocultures were established and stimulated with bradykinin (BK; 10 nM) or scorpion venom (SV; 10 pg/ml), both of which activate only neurites. Cell activation was assessed by confocal imaging of Ca2+ (cells preloaded with fluo 3), and analyses of RBL CD63-GFP+ granule movement were conducted. Neurite activation by BK or SV was followed by RBL Ca2+ mobilization, which was inhibited by an NK-1 receptor antagonist (NK-1 RA). Moreover, membrane ruffling was observed on RBL pseudopodial extensions in contact with the activated neurite, but not on noncontacting pseudopodia. RBL membrane ruffling was inhibited by NK-1 RA, but not NK-2 RA, and was accompanied by a significant increase in granule movement (0.13 +/- 0.04 vs. 0.05 +/- 0.01 microm/s) that was most evident at the point of neurite contact: many of the granules moved toward the plasmalemma. This is the first documentation of such precise (restricted to the membrane's contact site) transfer of information between nerves and mast cells that could allow for very subtle in vivo communication between these two cell types.12383860
PACAP enhances the expression of CD11b, CD66b and CD63 in human neutrophils.
Kinhult Johan, Egesten Arne, Uddman Rolf, Cardell Lars Olaf
Peptides
Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) is a neuropeptide with strong bronchodilator capacity, present in the human airways. There is recent evidence that PACAP decreases the release of proinflammatory cytokines. We have previously shown that PACAP inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis, but altogether little is known about the effects of PACAP on granulocytes. The present study was designed to investigate if PACAP and the closely related peptide vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) could affect the cell surface expression of CD11b, CD63 and CD66b in human neutrophils. Neutrophils isolated from 12 healthy blood donors were incubated with either PACAP or VIP, and the expression of neutrophil cell surface markers was assessed using flowcytometry. Neutrophils incubated with PACAP38 exhibited a marked, concentration-dependent increase in their expression of CD11b, CD63 and CD66b. In contrast, neutrophils incubated with VIP showed no increase of the investigated surface markers. This indicates a role for PACAP in granulocyte activation, mediated via a pathway not shared with VIP. Together with the previously presented data on leukocyte migration it suggests that PACAP acts as a regulator of neutrophil inflammation.12379326
Production and characterization of clinical grade exosomes derived from dendritic cells.
Lamparski Henry G, Metha-Damani Anita, Yao Jenq-Yuan, Patel Sanjay, Hsu Di-Hwei, Ruegg Curtis, Le Pecq Jean-Bernard
Journal of immunological methods
We describe methods for the production, purification, and characterization of clinical grade (cGMP) exosomes derived from antigen presenting cells (APCs). Exosomes have been shown to have immunotherapeutic properties through their presentation of biologically relevant antigens [Nat. Med. 4 (1998) 594] and are being developed as an alternative to cellular therapies. Exosomes are 50-90-nm-diameter vesicles secreted from multivesicular bodies (MVBs) found in a variety of both hematopoietic and tumor cells. These particles contain antigen presenting molecules (MHC class I, MHC class II, and CD1), tetraspan molecules (CD9, CD63, CD81), adhesion molecules (CD11b and CD54), and costimulatory molecules (CD86); hence, providing them the necessary machinery required for generating a potent immune response [J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 20121; J. Cell. Sci. 113 (2000) 3365; J. Immunol. Methods 247 (2001) 163; J. Immunol. 166 (2001) 7309]. Exosomes from monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDCs) were rapidly purified (e.g. 4-6 h of a 2-3 l culture) based on their unique size and density. Ultrafiltration of the clarified supernatant through a 500-kDa membrane and ultracentrifugation into a 30% sucrose/deuterium oxide (D2O) (98%) cushion (density 1.210 g/cm3) reduced the volume and protein concentration approximately 200- and 1000-fold, respectively. The percentage recovery of exosomes ranged from 40% to 50% based on the exosome MHC class II concentration of the starting clarified supernatant. This methodology was extended to a miniscale process with comparable results. Conversely, the classical differential centrifugation technique is a more lengthy and variable process resulting in exosomes being contaminated with media proteins and containing only 5-25% of the starting exosome MHC class II concentration; hence, making it difficult for their use in clinical development. Lastly, we developed the following quality control assays to standardize the exosome vaccine: quantity (concentration of MHC class II) and protein characterization (FACS). The combination of a rapid and reproducible purification method and quality control assays for exosomes has allowed for its evaluation as a cancer vaccine in clinical trials [Proc. Am. Soc. Oncol. 21 (2002) 11a].12361207
Association of platelet-derived microparticles with C-C chemokines on vascular complication in patients with acute myocardial infarction.
Matsumoto Noriko, Nomura Shosaku, Kamihata Hiroshi, Kimura Yutaka, Iwasaka Toshiji
Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
The levels of platelet-derived microparticles (PDMPs), platelet activation markers (P-selectin, CD63, and PAC-1 on activated platelets), and C-C chemokines (monocyte chemotactic peptide [MCP]-1 and regulated on activation normally T-cell expressed and secreted [RANTES] were measured and compared in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) or stable pectoris angina. These substances are thought to paricipate in the development of complications in patients with AMI. The percentage binding of anti-P-selectin, CD63, and PAC-1 antibody to platelets, and the levels of PDMPs (per 10(4) platelets) were higher in the patients with AMI than in those with stable pectoris angina (P-selectin, 23.1% +/- 2.1% vs. 10.3% +/- 1.2%, p < 0.001; CD63, 24.6% +/- 3.3% vs. 11.2% +/- 3.1%, p < 0.01; PAC-1, 14.1% +/- 1.7% vs. 9.3% +/- 2.1%, p < 0.05; PDMPs, 613 +/- 71 vs. 413 +/- 55, p < 0.01). There were no differences in platelet levels of GPIIb/IIIa and GPIb between groups. Levels of MCP-1 and RANTES were higher in the patients with AMI than in patients with stable pectoris angina (MCP-1, 430 +/- 35 vs. 265 +/- 23, p<0.01; RANTES, 175 +/- 32 vs. 88 +/- 29, p<0.001). The effects of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) on the levels of these agents in patients with AMI were studied. Platelet activation markers were significantly decreased in patients with AMI after PTCA. RANTES level was also significantly decreased after treatment, but MCP-1 level was not changed. In addition, this tendency was clearer in STENT patients. These findings suggest that in patients with AMI PTCA, particularly STENT, may prevent the development of complications in which activated platelet and RANTES participate.12349956
Inhibitory effects of relaxin on human basophils activated by stimulation of the Fc epsilon receptor. The role of nitric oxide.
Bani Daniele, Baronti Roberto, Vannacci Alfredo, Bigazzi Mario, Sacchi Tatiana Bani, Mannaioni Pier Francesco, Masini Emanuela
International immunopharmacology
This study investigates whether relaxin (RLX), a hormone previously shown to inhibit mast cell function and to stimulate endogenous nitric oxide (NO) biosynthesis, counteracts the activation of isolated human basophils stimulated with anti-IgE or phorbol ester, and, if so, whether NO is involved. RLX reduced dose-dependently the expression of the activation marker CD63, the release of histamine and the rise of intracellular Ca2+ levels which triggers granule release by stimulated basophils. RLX also blunts the ultrastructural signs of anaphylactic granule release. The effects of RLX appear to depend upon activation of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent NO synthase and endogenous NO production. They were reproduced by the NO donor sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and were reverted by the NO synthase inhibitor N(omega)-monomethyl-L-arginine, or by the NO scavenger oxyhemoglobin, or by blocking the NO physiological target guanylate cyclase with ODQ. In conclusion, RLX appears to play a role in down-regulating basophil function upon immunologic and nonimmunologic activation.12243731
Biogenesis of Weibel-Palade bodies.
Hannah Matthew J, Williams Ross, Kaur Jasber, Hewlett Lindsay J, Cutler Daniel F
Seminars in cell & developmental biology
Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs) are the lysosome-related secretory organelles of endothelial cells. Their content protein von Willebrand factor, plays a key role in haemostasis, whilst P-selectin in the membranes is critical in the initiation of inflammation. Biogenesis of these rod-shaped structures is driven by von Willebrand factor, since its heterologous expression leads to formation of organelles morphologically indistinguishable from bona fide WPBs. The two main membrane proteins of WPBs, CD63 and P-selectin, have complex itineraries controlled largely by cytoplasmic targeting signals. We are only just beginning to understand the way in which these three proteins come together to form mature WPBs.12237649
Platelet activation in the hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Harlow Françoise H, Brown Mark A, Brighton Timothy A, Smith Susan L, Trickett Annette E, Kwan Y-L, Davis Gregory K
American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
The purpose of this study was to determine whether platelet activation occurs only in preeclampsia or also in normal pregnancy.
Thirty women with preeclampsia, 30 women with gestational hypertension, 20 women with essential hypertension, 30 pregnant women with normotension, and 30 nonpregnant women were recruited at St George Hospital, Sydney, Australia. Platelet activation was determined by flow cytometry on whole blood samples.
Platelet activation was similar in all groups, except the group with preeclampsia. Compared with normal pregnant women, women with preeclampsia had significantly greater CD62 expression (1.35% vs 0.61%; P =.002), CD63 expression (1.73% vs 0.95%; P <.0001) and annexin V binding (1.03% vs 0.66%;P =.03) and significantly fewer circulating platelet microparticles (33 vs 49 x10(9)/L; P =.001). This was unrelated to other parameters that included platelet counts. Women with gestational hypertension in whom preeclampsia developed did not have enhanced platelet activation profiles.
Platelet activation is increased in preeclampsia but not in other hypertensive disorders or in normal pregnancy. This may be part of the pathophysiologic factors of preeclampsia complications but is not predictable by the platelet count and is not apparent in all women with preeclampsia.12230470
Human macrophages accumulate HIV-1 particles in MHC II compartments.
Raposo Graça, Moore Marilyn, Innes Donald, Leijendekker Richtje, Leigh-Brown Andrew, Benaroch Philippe, Geuze Hans
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Macrophages are important targets for HIV-1 infection and harbor the virions in an as yet unidentified organelle. To determine the location of HIV-1 in these cells, an extensive analysis of primary human macrophages infected in vitro with HIV-1 was carried out by immuno-electron microscopy. Virus particles were found to accumulate in intracellular multivesicular compartments which were enriched in major histocompatibility complex class II molecules and CD63. These features are characteristics of major histocompatibility complex class II compartments where maturing class II molecules acquire their peptide cargo. The membrane-delimited, electron-dense virus particles of 100-110 nm diameter labeled strongly for HIV-1 p24 antigen, major histocompatibility complex class II molecules, CD63 and, to a lesser extent for HIV-1 gp120 envelope protein and Lamp 1. Our data suggest that virus particles may access the lumen of the major histocompatibility complex class II compartment by budding from the limiting membrane, thus acquiring proteins of this membrane such as class II and CD63. Viral assembly and budding would therefore occur in macrophages by a process similar to the formation of the internal vesicles in multivesicular bodies and at the same location. This could account for the particular content in lipids and proteins previously found in the membrane wrapping HIV particles. Our observations also suggest direct fusion of the virus containing major histocompatibility complex class II compartment with the plasma membrane, leading to massive release of viral particles into the extracellular medium.12222140
[Diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity--state of the art].
Iancovici-Kidon M, Handzel Z T
Harefuah
Adverse drug reactions are ubiquitous in outpatient as well as inpatient clinical care. An allergic drug reaction is an immunologically mediated adverse drug reaction that exhibits specificity and recurrence on re-exposure to the offending drug. The diagnosis and treatment of drug allergies is limited by a number of factors. In most instances the exact epitope causing the reaction is unknown, the immunological mechanism is unclear, the presence of immunological recognition is not predictive of a clinical reaction and the gold standard for diagnosis, the drug challenge, a complicated and sometimes dangerous endeavor. Nevertheless, during the past few years a serious attempt at standardization and validation of in vitro and in vivo techniques for the diagnosis of drug allergies, has been in progress. New methods, like the basophil surface marker for activation, CD63 are replacing old ones like histamine release for immediate type hypersensitivity reactions. For instance, in the field of beta-lactam hypersensitivity, the specific epitopes are better defined and standardized protocols for both immediate and delayed type reactions are in the process of being introduced. A standardized European Network of Drug Allergies (ENDA) questioner, published in 1999, permits systematic data gathering of events surrounding the acute drug reaction, facilitating later immunological investigation and diagnosis. This review attempts to summarize the present and some of the future options in the diagnosis of this common iatrogenic complication.12197406
[Immunofluorescence determination using flow cytometry of platelet surface antigens in peripheral blood of healthy individuals (pilot study)].
Loudová M, Vokurková D, Hosková J, Krejsek J
Vnitr̆ní lékar̆ství
The authors present normal values of selected constitutive and activating platelet surface antigens expression. The results were obtained by flow cytometry analysis after immunofluorescent staining of the peripheral whole blood specimens from 25 healthy adults. Data are presented as a mean value and standard deviation (SD) of percentage of positive labelled platelets: constitutively expressed molecules CD9: 94.97% (+/- 2.95), CD31: 92.78% (+/- 2.97), CD36: 90.98% (+/- 5.25), CD41: 95.62% (+/- 2.23), CD42a: 94.98% (+/- 2.62), CD42b: 94.13% (+/- 2.58), activation molecules CD62P: 0.45% (+/- 0.33), CD63: 0.32% (+/- 0.22). This study is the first report in Czech literature.12190961
Effects of hormone replacement therapy on blood platelets.
Thijs A, van Baal W M, van der Mooren M J, Kenemans P, Dräger A M, Huijgens P C, Stehouwer C D A
European journal of clinical investigation
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) increases the risk of cardiovascular morbidity in postmenopausal women under certain circumstances. Part of this effect may be the result of the influence of HRT on blood platelets. We studied the effect of short-term oral hormone replacement therapy (unopposed oestradiol or sequentially combined oestradiol and trimegestone or dydrogesterone) on platelet activation parameters in healthy postmenopausal women.
We designed a prospective, randomised, placebo-controlled 12-week study. Sixty healthy, normotensive, nonhysterectomised, postmenopausal women received daily micronised oestradiol (E2) 2 mg (n = 16), or 2 mg E2 daily sequentially combined with either trimegestone 0.5 mg daily (n = 14) or dydrogesterone 10 mg daily (n = 14), or placebo (n = 16). Data on platelet activation were collected at baseline and after 12 weeks of treatment using flow cytometry.
Twelve weeks of treatment with combined HRT was associated with an increase in platelet activation parameters P-selectin and glycoprotein 53 (by 17% and 14%, respectively, P = 0.04 vs. the placebo group for both comparisons), suggesting alpha granule and lysosome degranulation. E2 replacement therapy was associated with an increase in P-selectin labelling by 22% (P = 0.04 vs. the placebo group).
Short-term treatment with oestradiol or combined HRT increases the amount of circulating activated platelets as measured by flow cytometry. This could be a mechanism by which short-term HRT might increase the risk of thrombosis.12175627
Expression of transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) proteins and their role in hepatic stellate cell motility and wound healing migration.
Mazzocca Antonio, Carloni Vinicio, Sciammetta Silvia, Cordella Claudia, Pantaleo Pietro, Caldini Anna, Gentilini Paolo, Pinzani Massimo
Journal of hepatology
Migration of activated hepatic stellate cells (HSC) is a key event in the progression of liver fibrosis. Little is known about transmembrane proteins involved in HSC motility. Tetraspanins (TM4SF) have been implicated in cell development, differentiation, motility and tumor cell invasion. We evaluated the expression and function of four TM4SF, namely CD9, CD81, CD63 and CD151, and their involvement in HSC migration, adhesion, and proliferation.
All TM4SF investigated were highly expressed at the human HSC surface with different patterns of intracellular distribution. Monoclonal antibodies directed against the four TM4SF inhibited HSC migration induced by extracellular matrix proteins in both wound healing and haptotaxis assays. This inhibition was independent of the ECM substrates employed (collagen type I or IV, laminin), and was comparable to that obtained by incubating the cells with an anti-beta1 blocking mAb. Importantly, cell adhesion was unaffected by the incubation with the same antibodies. Co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed different patterns of association between the four TM4SF studied and beta1 integrin. Finally, anti-TM4SF antibodies did not affect HSC growth.
These findings provide the first characterization of tetraspanins expression and of their role in HSC migration, a key event in liver tissue wound healing and fibrogenesis.12153149
Environmental stress on diving-induced platelet activation.
Bosco G, Yang Z J, Savini F, Nubile G, Data P G, Wang J P, Camporesi E M
Undersea & hyperbaric medicine : journal of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc
Platelet activation has been suggested to play an important role in the pathogenesis of prethrombotic states and thus may be responsible for decompression illness during compressed air (scuba) diving. To investigate the effect of physical, mental, and environmental stress on platelet activation during immersion in ice-cold water, we examined 10 male breath-hold divers (BHD), 10 elite BHD (eBHD), and 10 scuba divers during immersion in an ice-covered lake at moderate altitude. Platelet activation was examined by surface expression of activation-dependent glycoproteins CD62p, CD63, and CD42a with flow cytometry 10 min before and 1 min and again 24 h after diving. Plasma epinephrine level was also measured. In addition, the relationship between the activated platelets and the epinephrine level was evaluated. The percentage of platelet activation increased from 2.1 +/- 0.4 to 5.7 +/- 0.3, 1.8 +/- 0.3 to 12.9 +/- 0.8, and 3.7 +/- 0.9 to 31.2 +/- 0.8 in BHD, eBHD, and scuba divers, respectively. The percentage of platelet activation returned to pre-immersion levels in BHD and eBHD divers 24 h after diving, but was still higher in scuba divers. A positive relationship exists between the plasma epinephrine level and the percentage of the platelet activation. This study suggests that physical and mental stress enhance platelet activation during diving in ice-cold water.12149659
Effects of efonidipine on platelet and monocyte activation markers in hypertensive patients with and without type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Nomura S, Kanazawa S, Fukuhara S
Journal of human hypertension
We compared the levels of microparticles, platelet activation markers, soluble cell adhesion molecules, and soluble selectins between hypertensive patients with and without type 2 diabetes and control subjects. Binding of anti-glycoprotein IIb/IIIa and anti-glycoprotein Ib monoclonal antibodies to platelets did not differ significantly between the hypertensive patients and controls, but platelet expression of activation markers (CD62P, CD63, PAC-1, and annexin V) was higher in the hypertensive patients. Platelet-derived microparticle (PDMP) and monocyte-derived microparticle (MDMP) levels were significantly higher in the hypertensive patients than in the controls. Soluble ICAM-1, VCAM-1, P-selectin, and E-selectin levels were also higher in the hypertensive patients, and they were significantly higher in the hypertensive patients with diabetes. After treatment with efonidipine, the levels of PDMPs, CD62P-, CD63-, PAC-1-, and annexin V-positive platelets, sICAM-1, sVCAM-1, sP-selectin, and sE-selectin all decreased significantly. The MDMP levels decreased, and the decrease was significant in the hypertensive patients with diabetes. These findings suggest that administration of efonidipine to hypertension patients with diabetes may prevent the development of cardiovascular complications caused by cell adhesion molecules or activated platelets and monocytes.12147024
Ultrastructural changes and activation differences in platelet concentrates stored in plasma and additive solution.
Wagner Thomas, Vetter Angelika, Dimovic Natascha, Guber S E, Helmberg Wolfgang, Kröll Wolfgang, Lanzer Gerhard, Mayr W R, Neumüller Josef
Transfusion
The aim of this study was to demonstrate how ultrastructural morphology of platelets stored in different media correlate with the appearance of particular activation markers on their cell surface.
Concentrates of buffy coat-derived platelets were stored in plasma or a glucose-free citrate-acetate-NaCl platelet additive solution (PAS2, Baxter Healthcare Corp.). Activation markers on platelets were measured by flow cytometry and compared with changes in the platelet cell surface as demonstrated by electron microscopy. Levels of the vasoactive cytokines vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and RANTES (regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed and secreted) were determined in the storage medium of the platelet concentrate.
The activation markers CD62P and CD63 and the binding of thrombospondin measured by flow cytometry were expressed to a higher extent in the PAS2 group compared with the plasma group. The difference reached significance on Day 3 (CD62P: 66.37 +/- 2.44 vs. 37.83 +/- 2.03, p < 0.001; CD63: 42.11 +/- 3.29 vs. 34.84 +/- 2.04, p < 0.05; and thrombospondin binding: 18.84 +/- 3.9 vs. 13.98 +/- 3.87, p < 0.001, respectively). The form factor that is related to changes of the platelet shape was determined by image analysis and correlated significantly with the cell surface expression of CD62P (p < 0.001) and with CD63 (p < 0.05) and with thrombospondin binding (p < 0.05). The chemokines VEGF and RANTES were measured at higher levels in the PAS2 group.
With exception of baseline activation probably due to necessary handling procedures, platelets remain relatively unaltered and more stable in plasma in comparison to storage in PAS2.12139951
Expression of activation markers on alveolar macrophages in allergic asthmatics after endobronchial or whole-lung allergen challenge.
Viksman Michael Y, Bochner Bruce S, Peebles R Stokes, Schleimer Robert P, Liu Mark C
Clinical immunology (Orlando, Fla.)
We examined the effect of endobronchial (EB) or whole-lung (WL) challenge with ragweed or Timothy grass extract on alveolar macrophage (AM) activation. Expression of 17 constitutive activation markers on AM was examined by flow cytometry. Late-phase bronchial obstruction was greater after WL challenge, while changes in bronchoalveolar lavage cytology (eosinophil accumulation) were greater after EB challenge. After EB challenge, levels of 10 of 17 markers (CD11a, CD11b, CD14, CD18, CD23, CD32, CD63, CD64, HLA-class I, and HLA-DR) were significantly increased (by 33-234%, P < 0.05). Six markers (CD16, CD29, CD33, CD35, CD44, CD71, and HLA-DQ) remained unchanged. Levels of seven markers following EB challenge (CD14, CD16, CD18, CD29, CD32, HLA-class I, and HLA DQ) correlated with airway sensitivity to methacholine. WL challenge only increased expression of HLA-class I. The different results obtained with the two challenge methods probably depend on higher local concentrations of allergen in the EB challenge. We suggest that activation of AM occurs following EB challenge with antigen in asthmatics.12126199
Platelet function testing in apheresis products: flow cytometric, resonance thrombographic (RTG) and rotational thrombelastographic (roTEG) analyses.
Gutensohn K, Geidel K, Kroeger N, Eifrig B, Crespeigne N, Kuehnl P
Transfusion and apheresis science : official journal of the World Apheresis Association : official journal of the European Society for Haemapheresis
During storage of platelet concentrates, quality control of the units is mandatory. This includes the important testing of the hemostatic function of platelets. So far, mostly platelet aggregation analyses have been performed. In this study, new approaches were tested to evaluate the applicability of modern techniques for quality monitoring. Plateletpheresis was performed with two different cell separators (AMICUS cell separator, Fenwal, Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, USA; COBE Spectra, COBE BCT, Lakewood, USA). In each procedure split products (n = 22) were prepared and stored for 1-2 days (n = 22) or 3 5 days (n = 22). Platelet hemostatic capacity was tested by applying flow cytometry. platelet aggregation (platelet-rich-plasma [PRP]+agonist), resonance thrombography (RTG; PRP, no agonist) and rotational thrombelastography (roTEG; PRP+agonist). Flow cytometric analyses did not reveal significant changes in structural (CD41a. CD42b) or activation-dependent antigens (CD62p, CD63, LIBS, RIBS). Also, differences in the data from the flow cytometric reactivity tests were not significant between the two groups. In platelet aggregation assays, shape change (p = 0.8), maximum aggregation (p = 0.4), and maximum gradient (p = 0.8) did not show significant differences between the two groups. In the RTG test, differences between r-time (reaction time; p = 0.4), and f-time (clot formation time [fibrin influence]; p = 0.3), and in roTEG r-time (coagulation time; p = 0.1) and k-time (clot formation time; p = 1.0) were not significant. P-time (clot formation time [platelet influence]) and M (maximum amplitude) in RTG, and k-time and MA (maximum amplitude) in roTEG showed a slight decrease in platelet function (p < or = 0.05). We conclude that platelet function is well maintained during storage. This is reflected by the results of immunological and platelet function assays. Rotational thrombelastography (in the case of PRP) and especially resonance thrombography represent promising methods for quality control of platelet concentrates and rapidly provide information about the status of platelet function and the whole clotting process.12121870
The epithelial cell cytoskeleton and intracellular trafficking. II. Intestinal epithelial cell exosomes: perspectives on their structure and function.
van Niel Guillaume, Heyman Martine
American journal of physiology. Gastrointestinal and liver physiology
Intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) are located at the strategic interface between the external environment and the most extensive lymphoid compartment in the body. Besides their central role in the absorption of nutrients, they also provide sample information to the immune system on soluble or particulate antigens present in the intestinal lumen. Like professional antigen-presenting cells, IEC have recently been shown to secrete 30- to 90-nm diameter vesicles named exosomes from their apical and basolateral surfaces. These vesicles carry molecules that are implicated in adhesion and antigen presentation, such as major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules, MHC class II molecules, CD63, CD26/dipeptidyl-peptidase IV, tetraspan proteins, and A33 antigen. IEC exosomes therefore, constitute a link by which IEC may influence antigen presentation in the mucosal or systemic immune system independent of direct cellular contact with effector cells.12121191
Hemin, a heme oxygenase substrate analog, inhibits the cell surface expression of CD11b and CD66b on human neutrophils.
Andersson J A, Egesten A, Cardell L O
Allergy
Neutrophils are signaled to sites of infection and inflammation by different chemotactic stimuli. In order to reach the airways they have to adhere to, and then migrate through, the endothelium of pulmonary vessels. Carbon monoxide (CO) is a gaseous mediator, endogenously produced in the human airways. Increased CO production has been demonstrated during airway inflammation and CO as well as hemin, a substrate for CO producing enzymes, has been shown to affect neutrophil migration. Our objective was to investigate if the neutrophil cell surface expression of CD11b, CD66b and CD63 was changed during intermittent allergic rhinitis and to establish whether CO could affect the expression of these markers of cellular activation.
Blood from 10 healthy volunteers was drawn and incubated with different concentrations of hemin. Blood from 12 other healthy volunteers and from 12 patients with intermittent allergic rhinitis was also drawn during grass pollen season. Neutrophils were then isolated from all these three sets, and their expression of CD antigens measured using flow cytometry.
Patients with symptomatic intermittent allergic rhinitis exhibited lower levels of CD11b and CD66b on the neutrophil cell surface. Incubation with hemin decreased the expression of CD11b and CD66b. CD63 was generally weakly expressed and not significantly affected by hemin incubation.
Our results demonstrate that expressions of neutrophil cell surface glycoproteins are changed during the season in patents with intermittent allergic rhinitis and that hemin, a substrate for CO production, may act as an inhibitor of neutrophil activation. This indicates a possible role for CO in the immune defense system.12121189
Validation of a two-color flow cytometric assay detecting in vitro basophil activation for the diagnosis of IgE-mediated natural rubber latex allergy.
Ebo D G, Lechkar B, Schuerwegh A J, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
Allergy
IgE-dependent triggering of basophils not only elicits the release of different mediators but also the up-regulation of certain markers, e.g. CD63, which can be detected by flow cytometry. We intended to investigate if flow cytometric analysis of basophil activation could be a valuable tool in the diagnosis of latex allergy, and to evaluate if the basophil activation test (BAT) could be helpful in determining the clinical significance of a positive latex IgE in individuals with negative history and negative latex skin test. Additionally we aimed to determine the role of cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants (CCDs) in causing positive latex IgE without apparent clinical significance.
Twelve healthy controls without a history of latex hypersensitivity with a negative latex IgE and skin test (group 1), 24 individuals without a history of latex hypersensitivity with a negative latex IgE and skin test but with other inhalant allergies (group 2), and 29 latex allergic patients with a compelling history of latex allergy with a positive latex IgE and prick test (group 3) were enrolled. The diagnostic performances of the BAT were further evaluated in 13 individuals with a history of latex allergy but with negative specific IgE and/or skin test (group 4). Twenty-four individuals with positive latex IgE without apparent clinical relevance, i.e. without history of latex hypersensitivity and negative latex skin tests, were also analyzed (group 5). The putative role of CCDs causing positive latex IgE results without apparent clinical significance was evaluated by quantification of IgE for bromelain.
According, to the receiver operating characteristics(ROC)-generated threshold value of 17% between latex allergic patients and the pooled group of nonlatex allergic individuals, the sensitivity and specificity of the basophil activation test was 93.1% and 91.7%, respectively. In healthy controls, allergic patients without latex hypersensitivity and latex allergic patients the number of positive BATs was 0/12, 3/24 and 27/29, respectively. In the individuals with an evocative history of latex allergy but with negative latex IgE and/or skin test the BAT was positive in all 13 cases. Twenty of 24 individuals without apparent latex allergy but with positive latex IgE had a negative BAT. IgE for bromelain was positive in 1/19 sera from group 2, 1/24 sera from group 3, none of the 8 sera from group 4, but in 16/18 sera from group 5, respectively.
Flow cytometric analysis of activated basophils seems a highly sensitive and specific tool for diagnosing latex allergy. In addition, the technique might help to determine the clinical relevance of positive IgE quantification in the absence of overt latex allergy. CCDs of natural rubber latex allergens were confirmed to mimic latex sensitization.12119472
Platelet activation markers in patients with nephrotic syndrome. A comparative study of different platelet function tests.
Sirolli Vittorio, Ballone Enzo, Garofalo Donato, Merciaro Gabriele, Settefrati Nicola, Di Mascio Rocco, Di Gregorio Patrizia, Bonomini Mario
Nephron
Enhanced platelet reactivity may play a significant role in the genesis of the hypercoagulable state of nephrotic syndrome. However, the role of platelet function testing in nephrosis is controversial, partly because the methods used to assess platelet function (platelet aggregation and immunoassays of plasma beta-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4) have such marked methodological problems. In the present study, we evaluated several tests assessing platelet function in 18 adult patients with idiopathic nephrotic syndrome and normal renal function.
Platelet function was assessed by measurement of plasma beta-thromboglobulin (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, ELISA), plasma P-selectin (ELISA), circulating platelets exposing the activation-dependent antigens P-selectin (CD62P) and lysosomal GP53 (CD63) (flow cytometry), and by aggregation response to agonists such as ADP and collagen. Results were compared to those obtained in a group of 16 age- and gender-matched healthy subjects.
Levels of plasma beta-thromboglobulin (p = 0.001), plasma P-selectin (p < 0.001), and CD62P/CD63-positive platelets (p < 0.001 for both) were increased in nephrotic patients as compared to healthy controls. Platelet hyperaggregability in vitro was found in 13/18 patients. The reproducibility of platelet activation markers, as assessed by blood sample collection a week later from all patients, was found to be higher for plasma P-selectin (Spearman correlation coefficient, R = 0.99) and circulating activated platelets (CD62P: R = 0.97; CD63: R = 0.96) than for plasma beta-thromboglobulin (R = 0.78).
Pronounced platelet activation takes place in nephrotic syndrome and may contribute to the hypercoagulability of nephrosis. Whole blood flow cytometry assay of platelet activation and plasma P-selectin assay may represent useful tests to assess the hypercoagulable state in nephrotic patients.
Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel12117292
Cell activation and cellular-cellular interactions during hemodialysis: effect of dialyzer membrane.
Sirolli V, Ballone E, Di Stante S, Amoroso L, Bonomini M
The International journal of artificial organs
During hemodialysis (HD), circulating blood cells can be activated and also engage in dynamic interplay. These phenomena may be important factors behind dialysis membrane bio(in)compatibility. In the present prospective cross-over study, we have used flow cytometry to evaluate the influence of different dialysis membranes on the activation of circulating blood cells (leukocytes, platelets) and their dynamic interactions (formation of circulating platelet-leukocyte and platelet-erythrocyte aggregates) during in vivo HD. Each patient (n = 10) was treated with dialyzers containing membranes of cellulose diacetate, polysulfone and ethylenevinylalcohol (EVAL) in a randomized order. Upregulation of adhesion receptor expression (CD15s, CD11b/CD18) occurred mainly with the cellulosic membrane, though an increase in CD11b/CD18 circulating on neutrophils was also found with both synthetic membranes. Circulating activated platelets (P-selectin/CD63-positive platelets) increased during HD sessions with cellulose diacetate and polysulfone. An increased formation of platelet-neutrophil aggregates was found at 15 and 30 min during dialysis with cellulose diacetate and polysulfone but not with EVAL. Platelet-erythrocyte aggregates also increased with cellulose diacetate and at 15 min with polysulfone as well. Generally in concomitance with the increase in platelet-neutrophil coaggregates, there was an increased hydrogen peroxide production by neutrophils. The results of this study indicate that cellular mechanisms can be activated during HD largely depending on the membrane material, EVAL causing less reactivity than the other two membranes. It appears that each dialysis membrane has multiple and different characteristics that may contribute to interactions with blood components. Our results also indicate that derivatizing cellulose (cellulose diacetate) may be a useful way to improve the biocompatibility of the cellulose polymer and that there may be great variability in the biocompatibility profile of synthetic membranes, dialysis with polysulfone being in general associated with a higher degree of cell activation than EVAL membrane.12110828
Recombinant allergens promote expression of CD203c on basophils in sensitized individuals.
Hauswirth Alexander W, Natter Susanne, Ghannadan Minoo, Majlesi Yasamin, Schernthaner Gerit-Holger, Sperr Wolfgang R, Bühring Hans-Jörg, Valenta Rudolf, Valent Peter
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Traditionally, the diagnosis of type I allergies is based on clinical data, skin test results, and laboratory test results with allergen extracts. During the past few years, several attempts have been made to refine diagnostic assays in clinical allergy by introducing recombinant allergens and novel markers of IgE-dependent cell activation.
We have identified the ectoenzyme CD203c as a novel basophil antigen that is upregulated on IgE receptor cross-linkage. In this study we applied CD203c and a panel of recombinant allergens to establish a novel basophil test that allows for a reliable quantification of IgE-dependent responses at the effector cell level.
Patients allergic to birch (Bet v 1, n = 15; Bet v 2, n = 8) and grass (Phl p 1, n = 15; Phl p 2, n = 10; Phl p 5, n = 14) pollen allergens, as well as 10 nonallergic donors, were examined. Basophils were exposed to various concentrations of recombinant allergens for 15 minutes and then examined for expression of CD203c by means of flow cytometry. CD203c upregulation was correlated with the increase in CD63.
Exposure to recombinant allergens resulted in a dose-dependent increase in expression of CD203c on peripheral blood basophils in sensitized individuals, whereas no increase was seen in healthy control subjects. The effects of the recombinant allergens on CD203c expression were also time dependent. There was a good correlation between allergen-induced upregulation of CD203c and upregulation of CD63 (R = 0.76).
Flow cytometric quantitation of CD203c on blood basophils exposed to recombinant allergens is a useful approach to determine the allergic state in sensitized individuals and represents a basis for a sensitive novel allergy test.12110679
Expression of the palmitoylation-deficient CD151 weakens the association of alpha 3 beta 1 integrin with the tetraspanin-enriched microdomains and affects integrin-dependent signaling.
Berditchevski Fedor, Odintsova Elena, Sawada Shigeaki, Gilbert Elizabeth
The Journal of biological chemistry
Transmembrane proteins of the tetraspanin superfamily are assembled in multimeric complexes on the cell surface. Spatial orientation of tetraspanins within these complexes may affect signaling functions of the associated transmembrane receptors (e.g. integrins, receptor-type tyrosine kinases). The structural determinants that control assembly of the tetraspanin complexes are unknown. We have found that various tetraspanins and the alpha(3) integrin subunit are palmitoylated. The stability and molecular composition of the palmitoylated alpha(3)beta(1)-tetraspanin complexes are not affected by adhesion. To assess the significance of palmitoylation in the function of the alpha(3)beta(1)-tetraspanin complexes we mapped the sites of palmitoylation for CD151. Mutation of six cysteines, Cys(11), Cys(15), Cys(79), Cys(80), Cys(242), and Cys(243) was necessary to completely abolish palmitoylation of CD151. The association of the palmitoylation-deficient mutant of CD151 (CD151Cys8) with CD81 and CD63 was markedly decreased, but the interaction of the alpha(3)beta(1)-CD151Cys8 complex with phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase was not affected. Ectopic expression of CD151Cys8 in Rat-1 cells impaired the interactions of the endogenous CD63 and CD81 with the alpha(3)beta(1) integrin. Although the expression of the palmitoylation-deficient CD151 does not change cell spreading on the extracellular matrix, the number of focal adhesions increased. Adhesion-induced phosphorylation of PKB/c-Akt is markedly increased in cells expressing a palmitoylation-deficient mutant, thereby providing direct evidence for the role of the tetraspanin microdomains in regulation of the integrin-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling pathway. In contrast, activation of FAK and ERK1/2 were not affected by the expression of CD151Cys8. Our results demonstrate that palmitoylation of tetraspanins is critical not only for the organization of the integrin-tetraspanin microdomains but also has a specific role in modulation of adhesion-dependent signaling.12097766
In vivo platelet activation is increased during sleep in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Geiser Thomas, Buck Florian, Meyer Beat J, Bassetti Claudio, Haeberli André, Gugger Matthias
Respiration; international review of thoracic diseases
Patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) have an increased risk of cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction and stroke.
To determine whether in vivo platelet activation and the generation of procoagulant platelet-derived microparticles (PMP) are increased during sleep in patients with OSAS.
In vivo platelet activation and PMP formation was determined using flow cytometry in 12 patients with untreated OSAS during and after sleep (4 and 7 a.m.). To study the effect of treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), the measurements were repeated at the same time points after initiation of CPAP therapy. Healthy volunteers served as controls (n = 6).
Patients with OSAS had an increased percentage of platelets positive for the activation-dependent epitopes CD63 and CD62P during sleep (4 a.m.) compared to controls (4.8 +/- 0.8 vs. 1.9 +/- 0.4% for CD63, p < 0.01, and 2.0 +/- 0.5 vs. 1.1 +/- 0.3% for CD62P, p < 0.05). In OSAS patients, the amount of CD63- and CD62P-positive platelets was significantly elevated at 4 compared to 7 a.m. (4.8 +/- 0.8 vs. 2.6 +/- 0.4% for CD63 and 2.0 +/- 0.5 vs. 1.1 +/- 0.2% for CD62P, p < 0.05), but not in the control group. The levels of PMP were similar in patients with OSAS and controls at 4 and 7 a.m. After 1 night of CPAP therapy, there was a trend to reduced levels of CD63- and CD62P-positive platelets at 4 a.m.
Patients with OSAS have increased in vivo platelet activation during sleep, which may contribute to the increased incidence of cardiovascular events in patients with OSAS.
Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel12069189
Mechanisms of platelet-neutrophil interactions and effects on cell filtration in septic shock.
Kirschenbaum Linda A, Adler Daryl, Astiz Mark E, Barua Rajat S, Saha Dhanonjoy, Rackow Eric C
Shock (Augusta, Ga.)
ABSTRACT-We examined the mechanisms and the adhesive molecules mediating platelet-neutrophil adhesion in patients with septic shock. Neutrophils, platelets, and platelet poor plasma (NPPP) were isolated from 12 normal volunteers. Platelets and neutrophils were stimulated with platelet poor plasma (SPPP) removed from 12 patients in septic shock. Cell adhesion was assessed by filtration through 5-microm pore filters and by flow cytometry. Blocking monoclonal antibodies were used against the platelet and neutrophil surface receptors glycoprotein complex IIb/IIla, P-selectin, ICAM-2, CD11a, CD11b, and CD18. The filtration pressure (Pi) of cells suspended in SPPP was significantly greater than that of cells suspended in NPPP (24 +/- 1.0 mmHg vs. 14 +/- 1.0 mmHg; P< 0.05). The difference between the Pi of cells suspended in SPPP or NPPP (deltaPi SPPP-NPPP) in the presence of monoclonal antibodies anti-CD41, anti-CD62P, abciximab, anti-CD11a, anti-CD11b, and anti-CD18 was significantly less than the APi SPPP-NPPP of cell suspensions without the addition of these monoclonal antibodies (P < 0.01). The greatest reduction in Pi occurred when platelet receptor P-selectin was blocked simultaneously with the CD11b receptor on the neutrophil as compared to all other single blocking monoclonal antibodies or combinations of monoclonal antibodies. The mean fluorescence of activated platelet CD63-PE binding to neutrophils suspended in SPPP was significantly greater than that of cells suspended in NPPP (780 +/- 130 Ifu vs. 295 +/- 35 Ifu; P < 0.05). The greatest attenuation in mean fluorescence occurred by blocking the P-selectin receptor on the platelet simultaneously with CD11b receptor on the neutrophil. We conclude that platelet-neutrophil aggregation is increased in septic shock. This aggregation is mediated by the interaction of multiple platelet and neutrophil surface receptors. The platelet receptor P-selectin and the neutrophil receptor CD11b/CD18 appear to play the most important role in these interactions.12059056
Increased expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase in circulating monocytes from patients with active inflammatory bowel disease.
Dijkstra G, Zandvoort A J H, Kobold A C Muller, de Jager-Krikken A, Heeringa P, van Goor H, van Dullemen H M, Tervaert J W Cohen, van de Loosdrecht A, Moshage H, Jansen P L M
Scandinavian journal of gastroenterology
Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression and nitric oxide (NO) synthesis are increased in epithelial cells and in tissue macrophages of the inflamed mucosa from patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Since tissue macrophages are derived from circulating monocytes, we studied iNOS expression in circulating monocytes and related this expression to disease activity. In view of the possible role of NO in monocyte function, we also studied iNOS expression in relation to markers of monocyte activation.
The expression of iNOS in circulating monocytes from 15 patients with active IBD, 6 patients who went into remission and 18 healthy controls was quantified by flow cytometry and correlated with surface markers (CD63, CD11b, HLA-DR) for monocyte activation. In addition, iNOS expression in circulating monocytes was assessed by Western blotting, immunocytochemistry and measurement of the NO metabolites nitrite and nitrate in plasma.
The expression of iNOS in circulating monocytes and the percentage of iNOS-positive monocytes were increased in patients with active IBD compared to healthy controls (fluorescence index: 1.3 (0.1-6.3) versus 0.8 (0.0-1.8); P < 0.05: percentage of iNOS positive monocytes: 37.3 (1.0-77.0)% versus 5.3 (0.0-43.3)%; P<0.01). The six patients who went into remission all had a marked reduction of iNOS expression. iNOS expression was confirmed by Western blotting and immunocytochemistry. Plasma nitrite and nitrate levels were elevated in three patients with active 1BD. The surface markers for monocyte activation, CD63 and CD11b, were not elevated. HLA-DR expression was decreased on circulating monocytes from patients with active ulcerative colitis.
iNOS is increased in circulating monocytes from patients with active IBD and this increased expression correlates with disease activity. Considering the decreased HLA-DR expression and absence of monocyte activation markers, NO produced by iNOS may have a function in suppressing systemic monocyte activation.12056514
Differential effects of amphotericin B and liposomal amphotericin B on inflammatory cells in vitro.
Baronti R, Masini E, Bacciottini L, Mannaioni P F
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
To understand whether the pseudo-allergic reactions to amphotericin B (AmB) administration are due to AmB or to the solubilizing vehicles, a study was designed to evaluate the effects of AmB, liposomal AmB, (L-AmB), AmB-deoxycholate micellar complex (AmB-DC) and deoxycholate (DC) on the responses of rat serosal mast cells (RSMC) and of human basophils (HB), in vitro.
Serosal mast cells were obtained by density gradient centrifugations from male Wistar albino rats. Partially purified HB were obtained from healthy donors. The cells were exposed to AmB, L-AmB, AmB-DC and DC. Histamine release was measured fluorometrically, and the release of lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) was measured spectrophotometrically. HB activation was evaluated cytofluorimetrically by CD63 expression.
AmB and L-AmB did not evoke histamine or LDH release from either RSMC or HB. CD63 expression was not induced in HB challenged with AmB and L-AMB. On the other hand, AmB-DC and DC produced a cytotoxic histamine release from both RSMC and HB, and a sustained increase of CD63 expression on HB.
Only AmB-DC was able to induce the release of inflammatory mediators from RSMC and HB. Conceivably, the cytotoxic effect is accounted for by the micellar complexes with DC, which has been confirmed as a powerful histamine releaser, and held responsible for the pseudo-allergic reactions after AmB-DC administration. The data lend support to a better safety profile of L-AmB.12049721
Failure of trafficking and antigen presentation by CD1 in AP-3-deficient cells.
Sugita Masahiko, Cao Xiaochun, Watts Gerald F M, Rogers Rick A, Bonifacino Juan S, Brenner Michael B
Immunity
Endocytosed microbial antigens are primarily delivered to lysosomal compartments where antigen binding to MHC and CD1 molecules occurs in an acidic and proteolytically active environment. Signal-dependent delivery to lysosomes has been suggested for these antigen-presenting molecules, but molecular interactions with vesicular coat proteins and adaptors that direct their lysosomal sorting are poorly understood. Here CD1b but not other CD1 isoforms bound the AP-3 adaptor protein complex. In AP-3-deficient cells derived from patients with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS-2), CD1b failed to efficiently gain access to lysosomes, resulting in a profound defect in antigen presentation. Since MHC class II traffics normally in AP-3-deficient cells, defects in CD1b antigen presentation may account for recurrent bacterial infections in HPS-2 patients.12036870
C-kit associated with the transmembrane 4 superfamily proteins constitutes a functionally distinct subunit in human hematopoietic progenitors.
Anzai Naoyuki, Lee Younghee, Youn Byung-S, Fukuda Seiji, Kim Young-June, Mantel Charlie, Akashi Makoto, Broxmeyer Hal E
Blood
The transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) has come into prominence for its association with a wide range of cell surface molecules, especially integrins. We report that TM4SF molecules CD9, CD63, and CD81 are physically associated with c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase in the human factor-dependent myeloid cell line, MO7e. We characterized this complex using coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization methods. The c-kit coimmunoprecipitated with anti-TM4SF antibodies showed several distinct phenotypes compared to the total c-kit immunoprecipitated with anti-c-kit antibody. These included: (1) higher basal level of tyrosine phosphorylation without elevated kinase activity in the absence of Steel factor (SLF), (2) deficient enhancement of tyrosine phosphorylation and kinase activity in response to SLF, (3) elevated binding rate of SLF shown in chemical cross-linking studies, and (4) little internalization and degradation after SLF treatment. Cocapping studies in living cells showed that c-kit colocalized with TM4SF molecules after SLF stimulation, suggesting confirmation of the biochemical data obtained by the coimmunoprecipitation studies. Colocalization of c-kit with CD81 by SLF was also observed in cord blood CD34(+) cells, suggesting the existence of functional units of c-kit in TM4SF complexes in primary hematopoietic cells. This suggests that some TM4SF members may negatively modulate function of c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase and thus regulate receptor sensitivity to SLF in hematopoietic progenitors.12032632
Detection of monocyte-derived microparticles in patients with Type II diabetes mellitus.
Omoto S, Nomura S, Shouzu A, Nishikawa M, Fukuhara S, Iwasaka T
Diabetologia
The role of plasma monocyte-derived microparticles (MDMPs) and platelet-activation markers (platelet-derived microparticle [PDMP], platelet-bound CD62P [plt-CD62P], and platelet-bound CD63 [plt-CD63]) in diabetic vascular complications is not clear. We measured and compared plasma concentrations of MDMPs and the platelet-activation markers to investigate their possible contribution to diabetic vascular complications.
Activated platelets and microparticles (PDMP and MDMP) were analysed by flow cytometry. Concentrations of serum sE-selectin were measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
The concentration of MDMPs in diabetic patients was higher than in normal subjects. We found no differences in the binding of anti-GPIIb/IIIa and anti-GPIb monoclonal antibodies between groups. There were differences, however, in the concentrations of PDMPs, plt-CD62P, and plt-CD63 between Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus patients and control subjects (PDMPs: 585 +/- 25 vs 263 +/- 9, p < 0.01; plt-CD62P: 28.1 % +/- 1.4 % vs 9.4 % +/- 0.6 %, p < 0.001; plt-CD63: 28.1 % +/- 1.4 % vs 8.6 % +/- 0.5 %, p < 0.001). Amounts of MDMPs correlated positively with these platelet activation markers, and the relation between PDMP and MDMP was the most significant. The concentration of MDMP in patients who had diabetes complicated with nephropathy, retinopathy, or neuropathy was higher than in those without diabetes-related complications. The increase in MDMP was particularly significant in patients with nephropathy. Concentrations of sE-selectin were higher in Type II diabetes patients than in control subjects, and correlated with MDMP, PDMP, plt-CD62P, and plt-CD63 levels in nephropathy patients.
In Type II diabetes patients, we detected increased activation of monocytes, which could have been stimulated by activated platelets and PDMPs. Because the activation of monocytes is associated with vascular endothelial damage, high concentrations of MDMPs could indicate vascular complications in diabetes patients, especially those who have diabetes-related nephropathy.12021310
Induction of lymphocyte apoptosis by tumor cell secretion of FasL-bearing microvesicles.
Andreola Giovanna, Rivoltini Licia, Castelli Chiara, Huber Veronica, Perego Paola, Deho Paola, Squarcina Paola, Accornero Paola, Lozupone Francesco, Lugini Luana, Stringaro Annarita, Molinari Agnese, Arancia Giuseppe, Gentile Massimo, Parmiani Giorgio, Fais Stefano
The Journal of experimental medicine
The hypothesis that FasL expression by tumor cells may impair the in vivo efficacy of antitumor immune responses, through a mechanism known as 'Fas tumor counterattack,' has been recently questioned, becoming the object of an intense debate based on conflicting results. Here we definitely show that FasL is indeed detectable in the cytoplasm of melanoma cells and its expression is confined to multivesicular bodies that contain melanosomes. In these structures FasL colocalizes with both melanosomal (i.e., gp100) and lysosomal (i.e., CD63) antigens. Isolated melanosomes express FasL, as detected by Western blot and cytofluorimetry, and they can exert Fas-mediated apoptosis in Jurkat cells. We additionally show that melanosome-containing multivesicular bodies degranulate extracellularly and release FasL-bearing microvesicles, that coexpress both gp100 and CD63 and retain their functional activity in triggering Fas-dependent apoptosis of lymphoid cells. Hence our data provide evidence for a novel mechanism potentially operating in Fas tumor counterattack through the secretion of subcellular particles expressing functional FasL. Such vesicles may form a sort of front line hindering lymphocytes and other immunocompetent cells from entering neoplastic lesions and exert their antitumor activity.12013387
Down-regulation by cannabinoids of the immunological activation of human basophils and guinea pig mast cells.
Vannacci A, Zagli G, Marzocca C, Pierpaoli S, Passani M B, Mannaioni P F, Masini E
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
12010805
Translocation of the tetraspanin CD63 in association with human eosinophil mediator release.
Mahmudi-Azer Salahaddin, Downey Gregory P, Moqbel Redwan
Blood
The tetraspanin CD63 (also known as LAMP-3) has been implicated in phagocytic and intracellular lysosome-phagosome fusion events. It is also present in eosinophils, with predominant expression on crystalloid granule membrane. However, its role in eosinophil function is obscure. We hypothesized that CD63 is associated with intracellular events involved in eosinophil activation and mediator release. We used a combination of confocal immunofluorescence microscopy, flow cytometry, and secretion assays, including beta-hexosaminidase, eosinophil peroxidase, and RANTES, to examine CD63 expression, intracellular localization, and its association with cell activation and mediator release. In resting eosinophils, CD63 immunoreactivity was localized to plasma and crystalloid granule membranes. In interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)- or C5a/CB-stimulated cells (10 minutes), intracellular CD63 appeared to shift to the cell periphery and plasma membrane, while stimulation with a cocktail of interleukin-3 (IL-3)/IL-5/granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor induced the appearance of discrete intracellular clusters of CD63 immunoreactivity. IFN-gamma induced mobilization of CD63 to the cell periphery, which coincided with selective mobilization of RANTES prior to its release, implying CD63 association with piecemeal degranulation. Agonist-induced CD63 mobilization and cell surface up-regulation was associated with beta-hexosaminidase, eosinophil peroxidase, and RANTES release. Dexamethasone as well as genistein (a broad-spectrum inhibitor of tyrosine kinases) inhibited agonist-induced intracellular mobilization of CD63 and RANTES together with cell surface up-regulation of CD63 and mediator release. This is the first report of an association between CD63 mobilization and agonist-induced selective mediator release, which may imply the involvement of CD63 in eosinophil activation and piecemeal degranulation.12008098
Depression is associated with an increase in the expression of the platelet adhesion receptor glycoprotein Ib.
Walsh Marie-Thérèse, Dinan Timothy G, Condren Rita M, Ryan Martina, Kenny Dermot
Life sciences
There is a significant association between cardiovascular disease and depression. Previous studies have documented changes in platelets in depression. It is unknown if depression causes functional changes in platelet surface receptors. Therefore, we analyzed (1) the surface expression of glycoprotein (GP)Ib and the integrin receptor alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa), receptors involved in platelet adhesion and aggregation, (2) CD62 (P-selectin) and CD63, integral granule proteins translocated during platelet activation, (3) platelet aggregation in response to ADP and (4) plasma levels of glycocalicin and von Willebrand factor (vWF), in depressed patients compared to healthy volunteers. Fifteen depressed patients with a Hamilton depression score of at least 22 and fifteen control subjects were studied. Platelets were assessed for surface expression levels of GPIb, alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa), CD62 and CD63 by flow cytometry. Genomic DNA was isolated to investigate a recently described polymorphism in the 5' untranslated region of the GPIbalpha gene. The number of GPIb receptors was significantly increased on the surface of platelets from patients with depression compared to control subjects. Surface expression of CD62 was also significantly increased in the depressed patients versus control subjects. There was no significant difference between depressed patients and healthy volunteers in the surface expression of alpha(IIb)beta(IIIa) or CD63, or in glycocalicin or vWF plasma concentration, or ADP-induced aggregation. There was no difference in allele frequency of the Kozak region polymorphism of the GPIbalpha gene, which can affect GPIb expression. The results of this study demonstrate that the number of GPIb receptors on platelets are increased in depression and suggest a novel risk factor for thrombosis in patients with depression.12006654
Selective and signal-dependent recruitment of membrane proteins to secretory granules formed by heterologously expressed von Willebrand factor.
Blagoveshchenskaya Anastasia D, Hannah Matthew J, Allen Simon, Cutler Daniel F
Molecular biology of the cell
von Willebrand factor (vWF) is a large, multimeric protein secreted by endothelial cells and involved in hemostasis. When expressed in AtT-20 cells, vWF leads to the de novo formation of cigar-shaped organelles similar in appearance to the Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells in which vWF is normally stored before regulated secretion. The membranes of this vWF-induced organelle, termed the pseudogranule, are uncharacterized. We have examined the ability of these pseudogranules, which we show are secretagogue responsive, to recruit membrane proteins. Coexpression experiments show that the Weibel-Palade body proteins P-selectin and CD63, as well as the secretory organelle membrane proteins vesicle-associated membrane protein-2 and synaptotagmin I are diverted away from the endogenous adrenocorticotropic hormone-containing secretory granules to the vWF-containing pseudogranules. However, transferrin receptor, lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1, and sialyl transferase are not recruited. The recruitment of P-selectin is dependent on a tyrosine-based motif within its cytoplasmic domain. Our data show that vWF pseudogranules specifically recruit a subset of membrane proteins, and that in a process explicitly driven by the pseudogranule content (i.e., vWF), the active recruitment of at least one component of the pseudogranule membrane (i.e., P-selectin) is dependent on residues of P-selectin that are cytosolic and therefore unable to directly interact with vWF.12005158
Effects of in vitro exposure of alcohol on surface receptor expression of human platelets.
McKenzie Marcus E, Bell Christopher R, Horowitz Eric D, Oshrine Benjamin R, Atar Dan, Serebruany Victor L
Clinical physiology and functional imaging
Platelet inhibition after moderate alcohol consumption in patients with ischaemic heart disease may contribute to reducing the risk for developing acute coronary syndromes. However, the mechanism by which ethanol affects platelets is not clarified. We sought to determine the in vitro effects of alcohol on the surface expression of human platelet receptors using whole blood flow cytometry. Blood samples from 10 healthy volunteers were incubated for 30 min with 25 and 50 mmol l(-1) of phosphate buffered saline diluted grain ethanol, concentrations often used in in vitro studies. The surface expression of platelet receptors was determined by flow cytometry after fixation with 2% paraformaldehyde using the following monoclonal antibodies: CD 41 (GP IIb/IIIa), CD 42b (GP Ib), CD 62p (P-selectin), CD 51/CD 61 (vitronectin receptor), CD 31 (PECAM-1), CD 107a (LAMP-1), CD 107b (LAMP-2), CD 63 (LIMP, LAMP-3) and CD 151 (PETA-3). Dose-dependent inhibition of GP IIb/IIIa, P-selectin, CD 63 and CD 107a receptor expression was observed in the ethanol-treated whole blood samples. This study for the first time establishes a direct effect of ethanol on selective major platelet receptors. Beneficial cardiovascular properties of moderate alcohol consumption may be explained by ethanol's antiplatelet action.11994706
Activation markers of human basophils: CD69 expression is strongly and preferentially induced by IL-3.
Yoshimura Chitose, Yamaguchi Masao, Iikura Motoyasu, Izumi Shinyu, Kudo Koichiro, Nagase Hiroyuki, Ishii Akira, Walls Andrew F, Ra Chisei, Iwata Tsutomu, Igarashi Takashi, Yamamoto Kazuhiko, Hirai Koichi
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
The biological functions of basophils are precisely regulated by various cytokines in vitro, but little is known about surface markers that are upregulated during the cytokine-mediated activation process.
It has been well established that CD69, CD44, and CD54 represent "activation markers" for cytokine-mediated eosinophil activation. The objective of this study was to elucidate the expression and regulation of these molecules in human basophils in vitro as well as in vivo.
Basophils were purified from venous blood by means of density gradient centrifugation followed by negative selection. Surface expression was analyzed by means of flow cytometry. We also studied the expression of CD69, CD44, and CD54 on basophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and blood specimens from patients with asthma.
CD44 and CD54 were constitutively expressed on basophils and moderately upregulated by IL-3. On the other hand, CD69 expression was only weakly observed in freshly isolated basophils, but IL-3 induced extremely high levels of expression. Surface CD69 appeared rather slowly in comparison with CD63 and CD11b, and the induction of expression was completed within 24 hours. Basophil CD69 had no functional relevance, but it did have biological relevance. Whole blood basophils from asthmatic individuals expressed significantly higher levels of CD69 than did those from normal individuals. Furthermore, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid basophils showed higher levels of CD69 expression than did blood basophils from the same donors.
CD69 expression on basophils was preferentially and strongly upregulated by IL-3. CD69 on basophils might be useful as an in vitro as well as in vivo marker of activation of these cells by IL-3.11994486
Localized exocytosis of primary (lysosomal) granules during phagocytosis: role of Ca2+-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation and microtubules.
Tapper Hans, Furuya Wendy, Grinstein Sergio
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
The uptake and killing of bacteria by human neutrophils are dependent on the fusion of secretory granules with forming phagosomes. The earliest component of exocytosis was found to precede phagosome closure, so that granular membrane constituents were detectable on the plasmalemma. We show that during phagocytosis of IgG-opsonized particles, this early secretory response is highly polarized in the case of primary granules, but less so for specific granules. The vectorial discharge of primary granules was dependent on calcium, but no evidence was found that calcium is involved in determining the polarity of exocytosis. In particular, a redistribution of endomembrane calcium stores toward forming phagosomes could not be detected. Polarized granule exocytosis was accompanied by focal tyrosine phosphorylation and actin polymerization, although the latter was not required for the response. Instead, microtubules seemed to contribute to the vectorial nature of the response. During particle ingestion, the microtubule-organizing center relocated toward forming phagosomes, and colchicine treatment altered the pattern of exocytosis, reducing its directionality. We hypothesize that the focal activation of tyrosine kinases generates localized signals that induce exocytosis in a calcium-dependent manner, and that reorientation of microtubules facilitates preferential delivery of granules toward the forming phagosome.11987239
Identification of the presenilins in hematopoietic cells with localization of presenilin 1 to neutrophil and platelet granules.
Mirinics Zeljka Korade, Calafat Jero, Udby Lene, Lovelock Josh, Kjeldsen Lars, Rothermund Kristi, Sisodia Sangram S, Borregaard Niels, Corey Seth J
Blood cells, molecules & diseases
Most cases of familial Alzheimer disease (AD) are caused by mutations in presenilin 1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 (PS2). Presenilins are required for the proteolytic processing of the beta amyloid precursor protein, which yields beta amyloid peptide, the major component of extracellular amyloid plaques. In addition, presenilins are essential for proteolytic processing of other membrane proteins, including Notch, TrkB, and APLP2. Notch directs neural and hematopoietic development. Here we show mRNA and protein expression of PS1 in both lymphoid and myeloid cells, while PS2 mRNA is present only in lymphocytes. Expression of PS1 was found throughout myeloid development from CD34+ stem cells to platelets and neutrophils. PS1 expression was found in avian as well as mammalian blood cells. In neutrophils, PS1 colocalized with myeloperoxidase and CD63 within the azurophil granules as demonstrated by subcellular fractionation and double labeling immunogold electron microscopy. In platelets, PS1 colocalized with glucose transporter (GLUT-3) in the membrane of alpha granules, as evidenced by immunogold electron microscopy. The colocalization of PS1 and amyloid precursor protein in cell-specific granules suggests a conserved function across different tissues. These studies indicate that PS1 may play multiple roles in blood cell physiology and that blood tissue may provide a model to study PS1 interactions with other proteins.11980903
Indomethacin causes prostaglandin D(2)-like and eotaxin-like selective responses in eosinophils and basophils.
Stubbs Victoria E L, Schratl Petra, Hartnell Adele, Williams Timothy J, Peskar Bernhard A, Heinemann Akos, Sabroe Ian
The Journal of biological chemistry
We investigated the actions of a panel of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on eosinophils, basophils, neutrophils, and monocytes. Indomethacin alone was a potent and selective inducer of eosinophil and basophil shape change. In eosinophils, indomethacin induced chemotaxis, CD11b up-regulation, respiratory burst, and L-selectin shedding but did not cause up-regulation of CD63 expression. Pretreatment of eosinophils with indomethacin also enhanced subsequent eosinophil shape change induced by eotaxin, although treatment with higher concentrations of indomethacin resulted in a decrease in the expression of the major eosinophil chemokine receptor, CCR3. Indomethacin activities and cell selectivity closely resembled those of prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2)). Eosinophil shape change in response to eotaxin was inhibited by pertussis toxin, but indomethacin- and PGD(2)-induced shape change responses were not. Treatment of eosinophils with specific inhibitors of phospholipase C (U-73122), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (LY-294002), and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (SB-202190) revealed roles for these pathways in indomethacin signaling. Indomethacin and its analogues may therefore provide a structural basis from which selective PGD(2) receptor small molecule antagonists may be designed and which may have utility in the treatment of allergic inflammatory disease.11959120
Differential stability of tetraspanin/tetraspanin interactions: role of palmitoylation.
Charrin Stéphanie, Manié Serge, Oualid Michael, Billard Martine, Boucheix Claude, Rubinstein Eric
FEBS letters
The tetraspanins associate with various surface molecules and with each other to build a network of molecular interactions, the tetraspanin web. The interaction of tetraspanins with each other seems to be central for the assembly of the tetraspanin web. All tetraspanins studied, CD9, CD37, CD53, CD63, CD81, CD82 and CD151, were found to incorporate [3H]palmitate. By site-directed mutagenesis, CD9 was found to be palmitoylated at any of the four internal juxtamembrane regions. The palmitoylation of CD9 did not influence the partition in detergent-resistant membranes but contributed to the interaction with CD81 and CD53. In particular, the resistance of the CD9/CD81 interaction to EDTA, which disrupts other tetraspanin/tetraspanin interactions, was entirely dependent on palmitoylation.11929604
An alternate targeting pathway for procathepsin L in mouse fibroblasts.
Ahn Kyujeong, Yeyeodu Susan, Collette John, Madden Victoria, Arthur Joshua, Li Lian, Erickson Ann H
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
In transformed mouse fibroblasts, a significant proportion of the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin L remains in cells as an inactive precursor which associates with membranes by a mannose phosphate-independent interaction. When microsomes prepared from these cells were resolved on sucrose gradients, this procathepsin L was localized in dense vesicles distinct from those enriched for growth hormone, which is secreted constitutively when expressed in fibroblasts. Ultrastructural studies using antibodies directed against the propeptide to avoid detection of the mature enzyme in lysosomes revealed that the proenzyme was concentrated in dense cores within small vesicles and multivesicular endosomes which labeled with antibodies specific for CD63. Consistent with the resemblance of these cores to those of regulated secretory granules, secretion of procathepsin L from fibroblasts was modestly stimulated by phorbol, 12-myristate, 13-acetate. When protein synthesis was blocked with cycloheximide and lysosomal proteolysis inhibited with leupeptin, procathepsin L was found to gradually convert to the active single-chain protease. The data suggest that when synthesis levels are high, a portion of the procathepsin L is packaged in dense cores within multivesicular endosomes localized near the plasma membrane. Gradual activation of this proenzyme achieves targeting of the proenzyme to lysosomes by a mannose phosphate receptor-independent pathway.11929494
Flow cytometric basophil activation test by detection of CD63 expression in patients with immediate-type reactions to betalactam antibiotics.
Sanz M L, Gamboa P M, Antépara I, Uasuf C, Vila L, Garcia-Avilés C, Chazot M, De Weck A L
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
In this study, we used flow cytometry to determine the percentage of activated basophils that expressed the CD63 marker after in vitro stimulation by different betalactam antibiotics. The diagnostic reliability of the technique was assessed, as well as its correlation with specific IgE.
Fifty-eight patients with clinical allergy to betalactam antibiotics and presenting positive skin tests to at least one of the allergens (minor determinant mixture (MDM), benzylpenicilloyl-polylysine (PPL), penicillin, ampicillin, amoxicillin, cephalosporins) were tested. Thirty subjects non-allergic to betalactams were also studied as controls. The flow assay stimulation test (FAST) uses flow cytometry to determine the percentage of basophils that express CD63 as an activation marker after in vitro stimulation with allergen. Double labelling with monoclonal antibodies anti-CD63-PE and anti-IgE FITC was used.
The allergic patients show a statistically greater number of activated basophils than the control subjects, after the incubation of cells with all the betalactams at various concentrations. The sensitivity of the technique is 50%, the specificity 93.3%, the likelihood ratio for a positive value 7.46 and the likelihood ratio for a negative value 0.54. In spite of having a greater sensitivity (37.9%) and specificity (86.7%) than CAP, differences between sensitivity and specificities of both techniques (CAP and FAST) do not reach statistical significance.
The basophil activation test is a particularly useful technique in the diagnosis of patients with IgE-mediated allergy to betalactams and allows the identification of 50% of patients. Used in conjunction with CAP, it allows the identification of 65.5% of such patients.11927125
Comparison of in vitro closure time (PFA-100) with whole blood electrical aggregometry and platelet surface antigen expression in healthy volunteers.
Salat Andreas, Kroess Sabine, Felfernig-Boehm Dagmar, Felfernig Michael, Fleck Tatjana, Schmidt Daniela, Pulaki Sad, Mueller Michael R
Thrombosis research
It was the aim of this study to compare in vitro closure time (PFA-100), reflecting platelet-related primary hemostasis, to more platelet-specific tests like whole blood electrical aggregometry and platelet surface antigen expression in healthy volunteers. In vitro closure time was measured using a PFA-100. Platelet surface antigen expression (CD63, CD62-P, CD42b, CD36, CD31) was determined in accordance with the consensus protocol for flow-cytometric characterisation of platelet function. Platelet aggregometry was performed using a whole blood electrical aggregometer (ADP and arachidonic acid as agonists). Analysis of the obtained data revealed only a few significant correlations between the different platelet function tests used. This finding can be explained by the various aspects of platelet function being focused by these tests in different extents. Whenever platelet function is analysed, the investigator should be aware of the specific and limited evidence of the method used. For screening purposes, it may be useful to introduce a platelet function index, referring to basal platelet activity, platelet adhesion and platelet aggregation at low and high shear stress forces.11919422
Abnormal expression of CD antigens in mastocytosis.
Escribano Luis, Díaz-Agustín Beatriz, Núñez Rosa, Prados Aranzazu, Rodríguez Ramón, Orfao Alberto
International archives of allergy and immunology
Human mast cells are myeloid cells derived from human pluripotential CD34+ stem cells. Normal mast cells exhibit a myeloid immunophenotype characterized by the expression of CD117, CD33 and Fc epsilon RI in the absence of reactivity for CD14, CD15 and lymphoid-lineage-associated antigens. Multiparametric flow-cytometric studies have shown that mast cells from mastocytosis display unique immunophenotypic characteristics, including coexpression of CD2 and CD25 antigens together with abnormally high levels of the activation-related antigens CD35, CD63 and CD69 among others. Such aberrant immunophenotypic features are of great relevance in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of the disease, flow-cytometric immunophenotyping of mast cells representing the most sensitive method for the diagnosis of tissue involvement in mastocytosis. From the pathogenetic point of view, the immunophenotypical patterns described suggest the existence of profound changes regarding the adhesion and activation status of mast cells in mastocytosis and may represent a useful tool for a better understanding of some pathophysiological aspects of the disease.
Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel11907283
Role of adaptor complex AP-3 in targeting wild-type and mutated CD63 to lysosomes.
Rous Brian A, Reaves Barbara J, Ihrke Gudrun, Briggs John A G, Gray Sally R, Stephens David J, Banting George, Luzio J Paul
Molecular biology of the cell
CD63 is a lysosomal membrane protein that belongs to the tetraspanin family. Its carboxyterminal cytoplasmic tail sequence contains the lysosomal targeting motif GYEVM. Strong, tyrosine-dependent interaction of the wild-type carboxyterminal tail of CD63 with the AP-3 adaptor subunit mu 3 was observed using a yeast two-hybrid system. The strength of interaction of mutated tail sequences with mu 3 correlated with the degree of lysosomal localization of similarly mutated human CD63 molecules in stably transfected normal rat kidney cells. Mutated CD63 containing the cytosolic tail sequence GYEVI, which interacted strongly with mu 3 but not at all with mu 2 in the yeast two-hybrid system, localized to lysosomes in transfected normal rat kidney and NIH-3T3 cells. In contrast, it localized to the cell surface in transfected cells of pearl and mocha mice, which have genetic defects in genes encoding subunits of AP-3, but to lysosomes in functionally rescued mocha cells expressing the delta subunit of AP-3. Thus, AP-3 is absolutely required for the delivery of this mutated CD63 to lysosomes. Using this AP-3-dependent mutant of CD63, we have shown that AP-3 functions in membrane traffic from the trans-Golgi network to lysosomes via an intracellular route that appears to bypass early endosomes.11907260
Palmitoylation of tetraspanin proteins: modulation of CD151 lateral interactions, subcellular distribution, and integrin-dependent cell morphology.
Yang Xiuwei, Claas Christoph, Kraeft Stine-Kathrein, Chen Lan Bo, Wang Zemin, Kreidberg Jordan A, Hemler Martin E
Molecular biology of the cell
Here we demonstrate that multiple tetraspanin (transmembrane 4 superfamily) proteins are palmitoylated, in either the Golgi or a post-Golgi compartment. Using CD151 as a model tetraspanin, we identified and mutated intracellular N-terminal and C-terminal cysteine palmitoylation sites. Simultaneous mutations of C11, C15, C242, and C243 (each to serine) eliminated >90% of CD151 palmitoylation. Notably, palmitoylation had minimal influence on the density of tetraspanin protein complexes, did not promote tetraspanin localization into detergent-resistant microdomains, and was not required for CD151-alpha 3 beta 1 integrin association. However, the CD151 tetra mutant showed markedly diminished associations with other cell surface proteins, including other transmembrane 4 superfamily proteins (CD9, CD63). Thus, palmitoylation may be critical for assembly of the large network of cell surface tetraspanin-protein interactions, sometimes called the "tetraspanin web." Also, compared with wild-type CD151, the tetra mutant was much more diffusely distributed and showed markedly diminished stability during biosynthesis. Finally, expression of the tetra-CD151 mutant profoundly altered alpha 3 integrin-deficient kidney epithelial cells, such that they converted from a dispersed, elongated morphology to an epithelium-like cobblestone clustering. These results point to novel biochemical and biological functions for tetraspanin palmitoylation.11907077
TCR activation of human T cells induces the production of exosomes bearing the TCR/CD3/zeta complex.
Blanchard Nicolas, Lankar Danielle, Faure Florence, Regnault Armelle, Dumont Céline, Raposo Graça, Hivroz Claire
Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950)
We show in this study that human T cells purified from peripheral blood, T cell clones, and Jurkat T cells release microvesicles in the culture medium. These microvesicles have a diameter of 50-100 nm, are delimited by a lipidic bilayer membrane, and bear TCR beta, CD3epsilon, and zeta. This microvesicle production is regulated because it is highly increased upon TCR activation, whereas another mitogenic signal, such as PMA and ionomycin, does not induce any release. T cell-derived microvesicles also contain the tetraspan protein CD63, suggesting that they originate from endocytic compartments. They contain adhesion molecules such as CD2 and LFA-1, MHC class I and class II, and the chemokine receptor CXCR4. These transmembrane proteins are selectively sorted in microvesicles because CD28 and CD45, which are highly expressed at the plasma membrane, are not found. The presence of phosphorylated zeta in these microvesicles suggests that the CD3/TCR found in the microvesicles come from the pool of complexes that have been activated. Proteins of the transduction machinery, tyrosine kinases of the Src family, and c-Cbl are also observed in the T cell-derived microvesicles. Our data demonstrate that T lymphocytes produce, upon TCR triggering, vesicles whose morphology and phenotype are reminiscent of vesicles of endocytic origin produced by many cell types and called exosomes. Although the exact content of T cell-derived exosomes remains to be determined, we suggest that the presence of TCR/CD3 at their surface makes them powerful vehicles to specifically deliver signals to cells bearing the right combination of peptide/MHC complexes.11907042
Biosynthesis of surfactant protein C (SP-C). Sorting of SP-C proprotein involves homomeric association via a signal anchor domain.
Wang Wen-Jing, Russo Scott J, Mulugeta Surafel, Beers Michael F
The Journal of biological chemistry
Rat surfactant protein C (SP-C) is synthesized as a 194-amino acid propeptide (SP-C-(1-194)) that is directed to the distal secretory pathway and proteolytically processed as an integral membrane protein to yield its mature form. We had shown previously that trafficking of proSP-C is mediated both by a signal anchor domain contained within the mature SP-C sequence and by a targeting domain in the NH(2)-flanking propeptide. Based on evidence from other integral membrane proteins, we hypothesized that proSP-C targeting is effected by oligomerization of proSP-C monomers. To evaluate this in vitro, cDNA constructs encoding for either wild type proSP-C (pcDNA3/SP-C-(1-194)) or heterologous fusion proteins containing green fluorescent protein (EGFP) linked to SP-C-(1-194) (EGFP/SP-C-(1-194)), to mutant proSP-C lacking the NH(2) targeting domain (EGFP/SP-C-(24-194)), or to mature SP-C alone (EGFP/SP-C-(24-58)) were produced. In transfected A549 cells, fluorescence microscopy revealed that pcDNA3/SP-C-(1-194) and EGFP/SP-C-(1-194) were each expressed in CD63 (+), EEA1 (-) cytoplasmic vesicles. Expression of EGFP/SP-C-(24-194) or EGFP/SP-C-(24-58) resulted in translocation but retention in early compartments. When co-transfected with pcDNA3/SP-C-(1-194), both EGFP/SP-C-(24-194) and EGFP/SP-C-(24-58) were directed to CD63 (+) vesicles that also contained SP-C-(1-194). In contrast, trafficking of a folding mutant that forms juxtanuclear aggregates, EGFP/SP-C(C122/186G), was not corrected by cotransfection with pcDNA3/SP-C-(1-194). Chemical cross-linking studies of transfected cell lysates with bismaleimidohexane produced multimeric forms of both EGFP/SP-C-(1-194) and EGFP/SP-C-(24-58). These results indicate that sorting involves oligomeric association of proSP-C monomers mediated by the mature SP-C domain. Heteromeric assembly allows wild type proSP-C to facilitate trafficking of SP-C mutants with intact transmembrane domains but lacking targeting signals. We speculate that heterotypic oligomerization of wild type with SP-C folding mutants produces a dominant negative thus contributing to the pathology of chronic lung disease associated with patients heterozygous for mutant SP-C alleles.11897995
Staphylococcal exotoxins exert proinflammatory effects through inhibition of eosinophil apoptosis, increased surface antigen expression (CD11b, CD45, CD54, and CD69), and enhanced cytokine-activated oxidative burst, thereby triggering allergic inflammatory reactions.
Wedi Bettina, Wieczorek Dorothea, Stünkel Tanja, Breuer Kristine, Kapp Alexander
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Staphylococcus aureus colonization of the skin represents a potent trigger factor of atopic dermatitis. Our previous studies demonstrated that in atopic dermatitis eosinophil apoptosis is significantly delayed.
We sought to investigate the effect of staphylococcal exotoxins (SETs) on eosinophil apoptosis and functional activities.
Apoptotic eosinophils were investigated by determining their hypodiploid DNA peak. Eosinophil surface-antigen expression and intracellular production of hydrogen peroxide were assessed by means of flow cytometric analysis and respiratory burst by lucigenin-dependent chemiluminescence.
The SETs SEA, SEB, SEC, and toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 significantly inhibited eosinophil apoptosis in a manner comparable with that of high concentrations of IL-3. The LPS inhibitor polymyxin B was found to significantly inhibit LPS-mediated, but not SET-mediated, inhibition of apoptosis. Neither SETs nor LPS was able to modulate eosinophil surface expression of CD9, CD11a, CD16, CD40, CD44, or CD63. However, 24- and 48-hour incubation with all SETs, but not with LPS, significantly upregulated expression of CD11b and CD45 in a manner similar to that of IL-3, whereas dexamethasone induced a downregulation. Moreover, all SETs resulted in a significant upregulation of CD54 after 24 hours but not after 48 hours. Interestingly, CD69 was upregulated by means of IL-3 and SEB only. Neither direct stimulation of eosinophils nor 24-hour incubation with SETs or stimulation with SETs after a 24-hour prestimulation with IL-3, IL-5, or GM-CSF resulted in a significant extracellular production of reactive oxygen species or in a significant production of intracellular hydrogen peroxide. However, SEB and toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 were able to enhance cytokine-induced respiratory burst.
Taken together, our data demonstrate that SETs may modulate the course of the allergic inflammatory response through modulation of potent eosinophil effector functions. This may be of particular importance in atopic dermatitis, in which the skin is regularly colonized with SET-producing S aureus.11891806
Platelet activation and hypercoagulability following treatment with porcine factor VIII (HYATE:C).
Freedman J, Mody M, Lazarus A H, Dewar L, Song S, Blanchette V S, Garvey M B, Ofosu F A
American journal of hematology
Activation of platelets and coagulation in vivo was studied in nine patients with hemophilia A and inhibitors to human Factor VIII, prior to and following treatment with porcine Factor VIII (PFVIII; HYATE:C). In addition, six hemophiliac patients were similarly studied after treatment with recombinant Factor VIII (rFVIII). Platelet activation was also examined in vitro using porcine von Willebrand factor (PvWF)-enriched and PvWF-depleted fractions obtained by fractionation of PFVIII. Coagulation was assessed by measuring the concentrations of plasma prothrombin fragment 1+2 concentrations (prothrombinase generation) and Factor Xa-ATIII. Patients treated with PFVIII had significantly increased numbers of circulating platelets expressing CD62 and CD63 (markers of platelet activation) and annexin V (marker of platelet procoagulant activity) compared to patients treated with rFVIII; the former patients also demonstrated an increase in plasma coagulability after therapy. In in vitro experiments it was observed that the platelet-activating and procoagulant capacity of PFVIII resided in the PvWF-enriched fraction, and the same was true for the plasma hypercoagulability following exposure of platelets to PFVIII. These results support the hypothesis that PFVIII-induced platelet activation provides a mechanism for enhancing hemostasis, separate from, and additional to, that due to increased circulating Factor VIII, and it is due to residual PvWF in the PFVIII preparation.11889035
Late endosome motility depends on lipids via the small GTPase Rab7.
Lebrand Cécile, Corti Michela, Goodson Holly, Cosson Pierre, Cavalli Valeria, Mayran Nathalie, Fauré Julien, Gruenberg Jean
The EMBO journal
We report that lipids contribute to regulate the bidirectional motility of late endocytic compartments. Late endocytic vesicles loaded with cholesterol lose their dynamic properties, and become essentially immobile, including in cells from Niemann-Pick C patients. These vesicles then retain cytoplasmic dynein activity, but seem to be unable to acquire kinesin activity, eventually leading to paralysis. Our data suggest that this defect depends on the small GTPase Rab7, since the motility of vesicles loaded with cholesterol can be restored by the Rab7 inhibitory mutant N125I. Conversely, wild-type Rab7 overexpression mimics the effects of cholesterol on motility in control cells. Consistently, cholesterol accumulation increases the amounts of membrane-associated Rab7, and inhibits Rab7 membrane extraction by the guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor. Our observations thus indicate that cholesterol contributes to regulate the Rab7 cycle, and that Rab7 in turn controls the net movement of late endocytic elements. We conclude that motor functions can be regulated by the membrane lipid composition via the Rab7 cycle.11846462
Monitoring of basophil activation using CD63 and CCR3 in allergy to muscle relaxant drugs.
Monneret Guillaume, Benoit Yves, Debard Anne Lise, Gutowski Marie C, Topenot Ingrid, Bienvenu Jacques
Clinical immunology (Orlando, Fla.)
Allergic or pseudoallergic reactions that occur during anesthesia have been increasing for the last few years. To date, the diagnosis of allergy to muscle relaxants remains difficult. In this respect, we developed a flow cytometric method for the study of drug-induced basophil degranulation using CD63 and CCR3. Fifty patients who developed clinical features evocative of allergic reactions immediately after induction of anesthesia were included and classified into two groups. Group 1 (n = 39) comprised true allergic patients, who developed typical signs of shock associated to positive skin testing. Group 2 (n = 11) consisted of patients whose clinical history was not typical and skin testing was negative or nonconclusive. Seventeen control subjects were also studied in this report. We compared data from flow cytometry to skin tests, specific IgE, and histamine release results. Flow cytometry showed a sensitivity of 54%, while that of specific IgE was similar, at 62%. Interestingly, when considering the sensitivity of IgE + CD63 for diagnosis, we reached a sensitivity value of 80%. Of 15 negative results for specific IgE, we found 7 positive CD63 tests, while histamine release gave positive results in only 2 cases. Furthermore, the CD63 protocol showed good specificity (100%). We conclude that our flow cytometry protocol is a promising tool in allergy diagnosis since it is specific and complementary to specific IgE detection.
Copyright 2001 Elsevier Science (USA).11831870
Characterization of endogenous Chinese hamster ovary cell surface molecules that mediate T cell costimulation.
Gaglia J L, Mattoo A, Greenfield E A, Freeman G J, Kuchroo V K
Cellular immunology
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are commonly used in the generation of transfectants for use in in vitro costimulation assays. However, we have noted that nontransfected CHO cells can themselves provide a low-level B7/CD28 independent costimulatory signal for CD3-mediated murine T cell activation and IL-2 production. This study set out to identify those molecules that contribute to this CHO-dependent costimulatory activity. We describe a CHO subline capable of delivering potent CD28-independent costimulation to murine T cells and the generation of monoclonal antibodies against these CHO cells that inhibited this costimulatory activity. These blocking antibodies do not affect CHO cell-independent costimulation or bind mouse cells, suggesting an effect mediated by their target molecules on the costimulatory competent CHO cells. Immunoprecipitation and expression cloning revealed that these antibodies bound the hamster homologues of Crry (CD21/35), CD44, CD54 (ICAM-1), CD63, CD87, CD147, and an 80- to 90-kDa protein which could not be cloned. Expression of these hamster genes on COS cells demonstrated that hamster CD54 was able to costimulate both CD3-mediated IL-2 secretion and T cell proliferation by naive murine T cells independent of the other molecules identified.11827101
Cell surface phenotype and cytokine secretion in Caco-2 cell cultures: increased RANTES production and IL-2 transcription upon stimulation with IL-1beta.
Rodriguez-Juan C, Pérez-Blas M, Valeri A P, Aguilera N, Arnaiz-Villena A, Pacheco-Castro A, Martin-Villa J M
Tissue & cell
Caco-2 is a colonic tumour cell line which, when cultured, spontaneously exhibits enterocyte-like characteristics. Given the difficulties in maintaining long-lasting cultures of enterocytes, this cell line may be a suitable in vitro model to carry out experiments trying to delineate the involvement of enterocytes in local immune responses, and their role in pathology. It seems then reasonable to obtain a detailed immune analysis of Caco-2, and compare it with available data on enterocytes. Cytofluorometry revealed several leukocyte markers on Caco-2, present also on human enterocytes. These markers include surface proteases (CD10, CD13 and CD26), antigen-presenting cell markers (CD13, CD14, CD35 and CD63), integrins (CD18 and CD61), epithelial/endothelial markers (CD21, CD31, CD47 and CD59) and finally, CD25 and CD28. In contrast to enterocytes, HLA-class 11 molecules are not found on Caco-2, whether resting or gamma-IFN-stimulated. Moreover, culture experiments with allogeneic lymphocytes revealed that Caco-2 cells were unable to induce their proliferation. Cytokine analysis showed an increased RANTES synthesis and IL-2 transcription upon stimulation with IL-1beta. Finally, amongst RANTES receptors, CCR1 is found on Caco-2 cells, whereas CCR3 and CCR5 are not.11815741
Hymenoptera-venom-induced upregulation of the basophil activation marker ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 3 in sensitized individuals.
Platz I J, Binder M, Marxer A, Lischka G, Valent P, Bühring H J
International archives of allergy and immunology
Bee and wasp venoms are potent allergens capable of inducing severe clinical reactions. To detect immediate-type hypersensitivity to these allergens, a rapid in vitro test was developed that relies on the upregulation of ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 3 (E-NPP3) on activated basophils.
Blood basophils of 13 healthy donors and 22 patients allergic to bee or wasp venom were analyzed for E-NPP3 (CD203c) expression using monoclonal antibody 97A6. Basophils were analyzed by flow cytometry after activation with anti-IgE antibody or allergen. Venom-induced E-NPP3 upregulation on basophils was compared with diagnostic parameters, including skin tests and assessment of specific IgE. In selected samples, the increase in E-NPP3 expression on activated basophils was compared with histamine release and CD63 upregulation.
In 20/22 patients sensitized to wasp or bee venom, E-NPP3 expression on basophils was upregulated in response to activation by allergen or anti-IgE. The maximum increase in E-NPP3 expression (above ten times of baseline) was achieved after 15 min of stimulation with 1 microg/ml of allergen or anti-IgE antibody. Sensitized individuals who failed to upregulate E-NPP3 in response to IgE receptor cross-linking also failed to induce histamine release and CD63 upregulation.
Flow cytometric determination of hymenoptera-venom-induced upregulation of E-NPP3 is a novel in vitro test to identify sensitized individuals.
Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel11809908
Nonsense mutations in ADTB3A cause complete deficiency of the beta3A subunit of adaptor complex-3 and severe Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2.
Huizing Marjan, Scher Charles D, Strovel Erin, Fitzpatrick Diana L, Hartnell Lisa M, Anikster Yair, Gahl William A
Pediatric research
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is an autosomal recessive disease consisting of oculocutaneous albinism and a storage pool deficiency resulting from absent platelet dense bodies. The disorder is genetically heterogeneous. The majority of patients, including members of a large genetic isolate in northwest Puerto Rico, have mutations in HPS1. Another gene, ADTB3A, was shown to cause HPS-2 in two brothers having compound heterozygous mutations that allowed for residual production of the gene product, the beta3A subunit of adaptor complex-3 (AP-3). This heterotetrameric complex serves as a coat protein-mediating formation of intracellular vesicles, e.g. the melanosome and platelet dense body, from membranes of the trans-Golgi network. We determined the genomic organization of the human ADTB3A gene, with intron/exon boundaries, and describe a third patient with beta3A deficiency. This 5-y-old boy has two nonsense mutations, C1578T (R-->X) and G2028T (E-->X), which produce no ADTB3A mRNA and no beta3A protein. The associated mu3 subunit of AP-3 is also entirely absent. In fibroblasts, the cell biologic concomitant of this deficiency is robust and aberrant trafficking through the plasma membrane of LAMP-3, an integral lysosomal membrane protein normally carried directly to the lysosome. The clinical concomitant is a severe, G-CSF-responsive neutropenia in addition to oculocutaneous albinism and platelet storage pool deficiency. Our findings expand the molecular, cellular, and clinical spectrum of HPS-2 and call for an increased index of suspicion for this diagnosis among patients with features of albinism, bleeding, and neutropenia.11805154
Murine CD9 is the receptor for pregnancy-specific glycoprotein 17.
Waterhouse Roseann, Ha Cam, Dveksler Gabriela S
The Journal of experimental medicine
Pregnancy-specific glycoproteins (PSGs) are a family of highly similar secreted proteins produced by the placenta. PSG homologs have been identified in primates and rodents. Members of the human and murine PSG family induce secretion of antiinflammatory cytokines in mononuclear phagocytes. For the purpose of cloning the receptor, we screened a RAW 264.7 cell cDNA expression library. The PSG17 receptor was identified as the tetraspanin, CD9. We confirmed binding of PSG17 to CD9 by ELISA, flow cytometry, alkaline phosphatase binding assays, and in situ rosetting. Anti-CD9 monoclonal antibody inhibited binding of PSG17 to CD9-transfected cells and RAW 264.7 cells. Moreover, PSG17 binding to macrophages from CD9-deficient mice was significantly reduced. We then tested whether PSG17 binds to other members of the murine tetraspanin family. PSG17 did not bind to cells transfected with CD53, CD63, CD81, CD82, or CD151, suggesting that PSG17-CD9 binding is a specific interaction. We have identified the first receptor for a murine PSG as well as the first natural ligand for a member of the tetraspanin superfamily.11801726
The protein tyrosine kinase Hck is located on lysosomal vesicles that are physically and functionally distinct from CD63-positive lysosomes in human macrophages.
Astarie-Dequeker Catherine, Carreno Sébastien, Cougoule Céline, Maridonneau-Parini Isabelle
Journal of cell science
In macrophages, lysosomes are suspected to have a heterogenous population of vesicles. This study was thus undertaken to identify and to characterize lysosomal compartments in human macrophages. Hck is a Src-family tyrosine kinase associated with secretory lysosomes in neutrophils and with cytoplasmic vesicles in macrophages that fuse with phagosomes. We identified these Hck-positive vesicles and compared them to CD63-positive, M6PR-negative vesicles known as classical lysosomes. Hck vesicles exhibited lysosomal features. Indeed, Hck-positive vesicles could be loaded with rhodamine-dextran, which has been shown to accumulate in lysosomal compartments. Hck was delivered to zymosan-containing phagosomes at a late stage of the maturation process, which occurs after the fusion with CD63-positive lysosomes. Finally, when mycobacteria were used to prevent phagolysosome biogenesis, Hck was not recruited to phagosomes. Moreover, Hck lysosomes were physically and functionally distinct from CD63-lysosomes. For instance, sucrose induced swelling of CD63-lysosomes without affecting Hck-positive ones. Only CD63-lysosomes fused with phagosomes in a microtubule-dependent manner. Entry of particles through the mannose receptor and Fcgamma receptors drove the phagosome towards a fusion with CD63-lysosomes, whereas only Fcgamma receptors induced the mobilisation of Hck-lysosomes. This study provides further evidence for the existence of sub-populations of lysosomes in macrophages: one stained by CD63 and another one characterized by the presence of Hck. Therefore, Hck represents a new tool to study the fusion dynamics of lysosomal compartments and their subversion by several intracellular pathogens.11797399
[Determination of activated platelets: evaluation of methodology and application for patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura].
Hayashi S, Oshida M, Kiyokawa T, Aochi H, Honda S, Tomiyama Y, Kurata Y
Rinsho byori. The Japanese journal of clinical pathology
Platelet activation causes a change in surface expression of several endogenous proteins, such as CD62P, CD63 and CD40L. Therefore, it is possible to analyze the functional in vivo status of the circulating platelet population directly by flow cytometry. In this study we developed the method to be suitable for use in clinical studies. We used EDTA-2K as anticoagulant since the sample anticoagulated with EDTA-2K, sodium citrate or ACD-A showed no difference in the data of activated platelets. We determined whether fixation of sample is necessary. The samples stained before or without fixation showed abnormally high level of activated platelets, indicating that fixation is necessary before staining. It is controversial whether activated platelets circulate in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura(ITP). We measured activated platelets in patients with ITP using our optimised method. The percentages of CD62P, CD63 and CD40L positive platelets were significantly high in patients with ITP and 24%, 55% and 36% (respectively) of ITP patients showed elevated level of activated platelets. These data indicate that activated platelets circulate in ITP patients.11786426
Inhibition of cytoskeletal assembly by cytochalasin B prevents signaling through tyrosine phosphorylation and secretion triggered by collagen but not by thrombin.
Díaz-Ricart Maribel, Arderiu Gemma, Estebanell Eva, Pérez-Pujol Silvia, Lozano Miguel, White James G, Escolar Ginés, Ordinas Antonio
The American journal of pathology
Activation of platelets leads to cytoskeletal assembly that is responsible for platelet motility and internal contraction. We have evaluated the involvement of the cytoskeleton in platelet activation by two strong agonists, collagen and thrombin. Activation was assessed by measuring changes in cytoskeletal assembly, externalization of activation-dependent markers and expression of procoagulant activity, and tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins, in both the absence and the presence of cytochalasin B. Activation of platelets with collagen and thrombin induced morphological changes and increased the expression of CD62P, CD63, glycoprotein IV, and binding of annexin V to platelets. Moreover, both activating agents induced actin polymerization, increased the association of other contractile proteins, and promoted tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple proteins, some of which were associated with the cytoskeleton. The presence of cytochalasin B blocked the previous events when collagen was used as the activating agent, although binding of annexin V still occurred. In contrast, platelet response to thrombin was not completely prevented by the presence of cytochalasin B. Thus, activation by collagen requires a functional cytoskeleton to trigger signaling through tyrosine phosphorylation and secretion. This is not the case for thrombin, which is capable of activating signaling mechanisms in the presence of strong inhibitors of cytoskeletal assembly. Moreover, the expression of a procoagulant surface in platelets still occurs even when platelet motility has been inhibited.11783333
[Influence of feiliuping No. 2 on platelet surface glycoprotein expression in mid-late stage lung cancer patients].
Zhang P, Piao B, Sun G
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban
To explore the influence of Feiliuping NO. 2 (FLP), a Chinese herbal preparation for reinforcing Qi, nourishing Yin, activating blood circulation and detoxifying, on surface glycoprotein expression (SGPE) and activated condition of platelet in mid-late stage lung cancer patients.
Changes of platelet surface expression of CD41/CD42a, CD36/TSP, CD62/CD63, CD9 and CD31 were measured before and after FLP treatment by using flow cytometer in 30 cases of mid-late stage lung cancer.
The SGPE and activated condition of platelet in mid-late stage lung cancer patients were significantly higher than those of healthy person, and both could be reduced partly by FLP.
FLP could influence the SGPE and activate condition of platelet in lung cancer patients.11783184
[Significance of platelet CD62p, CD63 assessment in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with blood stasis].
Jiang Z, Zhang S, Kou T
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban
To study the relationship between blood stasis and platelet activation and the influential factors on the latter in type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) patients.
Platelet CD62p, CD63 expressions were determined in 30 patients of type 2 DM with blood stasis, 27 patients of type 2 DM without blood stasis and 20 normal controls by flow cytometry.
CD62p, CD63 levels were significantly higher in type 2 DM with blood stasis group than that without blood stasis group and in normal controls. CD62p was positively correlated with CD63, while positive correlation existed between HbA1c, LDL-C and CD62p in DM patients with blood stasis.
The increased level of platelet activation was the primary molecular basis in type 2 DM. It was important to perform the Syndrome Differentiation of blood stasis and treatment of activating blood circulation to remove blood stasis in type 2 DM.11774251
Effects of cytarabine and various anthracyclins on platelet activation: characterization of in vitro effects and their possible clinical relevance in acute myelogenous leukemia.
Foss Brynjar, Ulvestad Elling, Hervig Tor, Bruserud Øystein
International journal of cancer. Journal international du cancer
Previous in vitro studies have demonstrated that normal platelets and platelet-released mediators can alter in vitro characteristics of human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) blasts. To further investigate whether platelets can be expected to adhere to and thereby affect AML blasts through their release of soluble mediators into a common microenvironment, we investigated (i) the effects on platelet activation by cytotoxic drugs commonly used in AML therapy; (ii) the occurrence of circulating activated platelets in acute leukemia patients; and (iii) the in vivo and in vitro adherence of platelets to AML blasts. The anthracyclins daunorubicin and idarubicin increased the expression of activation-associated membrane molecules (GPIIb/IIIa, CD62P, CD63) by normal platelets, daunorubicin then having the strongest effect. In contrast, cytarabine, epirubicin, doxorubicin and mitoxantrone had no significant effects. Although AML patients did not show increased levels of activated platelets in the circulation, adhesion of platelets to AML blasts was demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. These results suggest that platelets and AML blasts may locate to common in vivo microenvironments, and platelet-derived soluble mediators may thereby affect the functional characteristics of the leukemia cells.
Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.11764278
The role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase in the sorting and transport of newly synthesized tyrosinase-related protein-1 (TRP-1).
Chen H, Salopek T G, Jimbow K
The journal of investigative dermatology. Symposium proceedings / the Society for Investigative Dermatology, Inc. [and] European Society for Dermatological Research
Tyrosinase-related protein-1 (TRP-1) is a 75 kDa type-1 transmembrane glycoprotein localized to the melanosome. The mechanism by which newly synthesized TRP-1 reaches its ultimate destination is currently unknown, but has been speculated to occur via the endosomal pathway. Recently, it has been shown that phosphatidylinositide (PI) 3-kinase is involved in various cellular functions, including regulating the constitutive movement of proteins from one intracellular compartment to another; however, whether PI 3-kinase participates in the trafficking of proteins such as TRP-1 to the melanosome is unknown. In this study we investigate the role of PI 3-kinase on the trafficking of TRP-1 in human melanoma MeWo cells using wortmannin, a potent inhibitor of PI 3-kinase. Our investigations demonstrate that wortmannin interferes with the membrane trafficking of TRP-1 in MeWo cells, and that it specifically results in the redistribution of the protein within a novel vesicular compartment with characteristics of the endosomal and lysosomal compartments [positive for LAMP-1, and partially positive for CD63 and cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptors (CI-M6PR)], and is accessible to internalized proteins such as immunoglobulins. Movement within this novel compartment is microtubule and GTPase dependent. These findings have led us to postulate that TRP-1 is sorted from the trans-Golgi network to a compartment in the vicinity of late endosomes, trafficking from which to the melanosome appears to be dependent on PI 3-kinase as it is blocked by wortmannin.11755950
Platelet procoagulant activity induced in vivo by muromonab-CD3 infusion in uremic patients.
Lozano M, Oppenheimer F, Cofan F, Rosinyol L, Mazzara R, Escolar G, Ordinas A
Thrombosis research
Muromonab-CD3 is a murine monoclonal antibody (MoAb) that is used in the prophylaxis and treatment of acute graft rejection. Activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis following anti-CD3 administration have been reported in some patients to lead to irreversible intragraft thrombosis.
We have studied the effect of muromonab-CD3 infusion on platelets using flow cytometry in six patients who received three daily doses of muromonab-CD3 as prophylaxis of rejection before receiving a living donor renal transplant. Samples were collected before, 15 and 60 min after muromonab-CD3 infusion. Immunolabeling of platelets was performed in whole blood using dual-color analysis. The following conjugated MoAb were used: anti-CD41a, -CD36, -CD42b, -CD62P, -CD63, -factor V/Va and nonspecific Ig. Samples were analyzed with a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA, USA).
After muromonab-CD3 infusion, an increase in the binding of MoAb anti-factor V/Va to platelets was seen, which was only statistically significant (2.2% vs. 12.8%, P=.04) after 15 min of the second dose. No significant changes were seen in the other MoAbs studied. No thrombotic complications were observed after transplantation.
In uremic patients receiving muromonab-CD3 infusion as prophylaxis of graft rejection, an increase in the binding of anti-factor V/Va, denoting an increased exposure of anionic phospholipids in platelets, was seen. This increase in platelet procoagulant activity might contribute to the appearance of thromboses within renal graft seen in some patients who received muromonab-CD3.11751509
Clinical significance of CD151 gene expression in non-small cell lung cancer.
Tokuhara T, Hasegawa H, Hattori N, Ishida H, Taki T, Tachibana S, Sasaki S, Miyake M
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research
Transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) is a recently described gene family, and TM4SF members are known to play roles in the signal transduction pathways and to regulate cell activation, development, proliferation, and motility. MRP-1/CD9, KAI1/CD82, and ME491/CD63, members of the TM4SF, have been reported to suppress tumor progression or metastasis. Previously, we showed that MRP-1/CD9 suppressed cell motility and metastatic potential to lungs. Moreover, reduction of MRP-1/CD9 and KAI1/CD82 gene expression was found to be a factor in a poor prognosis for patients with non-small cell lung cancer. However, among TM4SF, CD151 is identical to an existing gene, PETA-3, which may promote tumor metastasis of malignant cells, and its expression may be involved in the malignant progression of cancer. The function of CD151 is opposite that of the metastasis suppressor genes, MRP-1/CD9 and KAI1/CD82. On the basis of these results, we used reverse transcription-PCR and immunohistochemical techniques for a retrospective study of CD151 gene expression in tumor tissues from 145 lung cancer patients; 72 tumors were stage I, 29 stage II, 27 stage IIIA, and 17 stage IIIB. Whereas 86 patients had tumors positive for the CD151 gene, 59 had tumors that were negative for the CD151 gene. The overall survival rate of patients with CD151-positive tumors was much lower than that of CD151-negative patients (51.9% versus 73.1%; P = 0.013). Our findings suggest that high CD151 gene expression in lung cancer may be associated with a poor prognosis. Assessment of CD151 could be instrumental for improvements in lung cancer diagnosis and therapies.11728532
Paradoxical activation of major platelet receptors in the methadone-maintained patients after single pill of aspirin.
Malinin A I, Callahan K P, Serebruany V L
Thrombosis research
Chronic drug abuse is an established cause of acute coronary events and sudden death. The association between use of narcotics and platelet abnormalities is well described. However, it is still not clear, how aspirin affects expression of major platelet receptors in chronic drug users with coronary artery disease, especially those recovering in the methadone clinic maintenance program. We sought to compare how a single pill of non-enteric coated aspirin (325-mg) affects human platelets in patients with coronary artery disease dependent on methadone use.
Data from 30 subjects were analyzed, eight of them were the chronic drug addicts, and participated in a methadone recovery program. Platelets were assessed twice at baseline (pre-aspirin), and after 3-24 hours (post-aspirin). The expression of platelet receptors was determined by using the following monoclonal antibodies: CD31 (PECAM-1), CD41 (GPIIb), CD42b (GPIb), CD51/CD61 (vitronectin receptor), CD62p (P-selectin), CD63 (LIMP or LAMP-3), CD107a (LAMP-1), CD151 (PETA-3), and PAC-1 for fibrinogen-platelet binding determination (PharMingen, San Diego, CA). Platelet-leukocyte interactions were assessed by using dual antibodies for a pan-platelet marker (CD151), together with CD14, a monocyte/macrophage marker.
In a drug free group, digestion of a single tablet of aspirin resulted in a significantly (p<0.05) diminished expression of PECAM-1, GP IIb, fibrinogen binding with PAC-1 antibody, GP Ib, P-selectin, and CD151. In contrast, patients receiving methadone exhibited opposite trends, resultant in a paradoxical activation of major platelet receptors after digestion of aspirin. These differences reached statistical significance (p<0.05) for PECAM-1, GPIIb, and P-selectin expression.
There are some fundamental differences in the responsiveness to aspirin in chronic methadone users when compared with drug-free patients. Suspecting narcotics abuse may be critical in patients with limited aspirin efficacy, or those who developed an aspirin resistance. Unexpected platelet activation may indeed represent a missing link between use of narcotics and enhanced incidence of vascular death in this high-risk population.11717951
A study of platelet organelles and membrane glycoprotein in patients with Binswanger's disease.
Chen C, Jia H, Wang H, Guo S, Chen T
Chinese medical journal
To discuss the possible role of platelets in Binswanger's disease by studying the changes of organelles and membrane glycoprotein in platelets.
The organelles (dense bodies, alpha granules, and mitochondria) within platelets were measured with transmission electron microscopy in 25 patients with Binswanger's disease and matched controls, while alpha granule membrane glycoprotein CD62 and lysosomal integral membrane glycoprotein CD63 on platelet membrane were analyzed by flow cytometry.
The percentage of CD62-positive platelets was 3.6% +/- 2.1% and 5.7% +/- 2.4% in controls and in patients, respectively (P < 0.01). The percentage of CD63 expression platelets was 3.1% +/- 2.2% and 3.2% +/- 2.3% in controls and patients, respectively (P > 0.05). When compared with controls, platelets of patients contained fewer alpha granules (P < 0.01), and had no changes in dense bodies and mitochondria (P > 0.05). CD62 levels were different among patients with regarding to the degree of white matter low attenuation.
There is selective degranuation of platelets in patients with Binswanger's disease and the abnormalities of platelet secretion may play a role in the pathophysiology of this illness.11703349
Increased circulating platelet-leucocyte complexes and platelet activation in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.
Joseph J E, Harrison P, Mackie I J, Isenberg D A, Machin S J
British journal of haematology
It is possible that platelet activation may play a pathogenic role in the increased risk of thrombosis associated with antiphospholipid antibodies (APA). In this study, levels of in vivo platelet activation were measured in 20 patients with primary antiphospholipid syndrome (PAPS) and 30 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients (14 of whom had secondary APS) using sensitive flow cytometry. Soluble P-selectin levels were also assayed. Platelet CD63 expression was significantly higher in PAPS than normal controls (P = 0.007), as well as SLE patients with and without secondary APS (P = 0.03 and P = 0.002 respectively). PAC-1 binding was significantly higher in PAPS than the control group (P = 0.007) and SLE patients without APS (P = 0.015). Platelet-leucocyte complexes were significantly higher in SLE patients than both PAPS and the control group, and platelet-monocyte complexes were significantly increased in PAPS compared with the control group. (Platelet-leucocyte complexes were also significantly higher than controls in 10 rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients without APA). Soluble P-selectin levels were significantly higher in PAPS and SLE patients than the control group. Platelet CD62p expression, annexin V binding and platelet microparticle numbers were not increased in PAPS or SLE patients. We conclude that there is evidence of increased platelet activation in PAPS and SLE, and this is important to note as it may have potential therapeutic implications with respect to use of antiplatelet agents in these patients.11583705
High-shear-stress-induced activation of platelets and microparticles enhances expression of cell adhesion molecules in THP-1 and endothelial cells.
Nomura S, Tandon N N, Nakamura T, Cone J, Fukuhara S, Kambayashi J
Atherosclerosis
Interaction between leukocyte and endothelial cells (ECs) is essential for vascular homeostasis and competent immune-inflammatory responses in vivo. Platelet-derived microparticles (PMPs) are generated by high shear stress and may appear in diseased small arteries and arterioles in various clinical settings. In this study, we used flow cytometry and confocal laser scanning microscopy to investigate the effects of high-shear-induced platelet and microparticle activation in adhesion molecules of THP-1 and ECs. We also measured the production of some cytokines and studied cytokine mRNA from THP-1 and ECs after PMP stimulation. PMP stimulation of THP-1 cells increased CD11b, CD32, and CD33 but not CD29, CD31, and CD36. PMP stimulation of ECs increased CD54 and CD63 but not CD9, CD29, and CD31. PMPs induced interleukin-8 (IL-8), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha) production by THP-1. PMPs also induced IL-8, IL-1 beta, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) production by ECs. Production was time-dependent. With RT-PCR, some cytokine mRNAs were detected in THP-1 and ECs after PMP stimulation. In relation to adhesiveness after PMP stimulation, we could clearly observe a shift in distribution not only of CD11b in THP-1 cells but also of CD54 in ECs. In addition, anti-P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 antibody reduced the expression of CD11b, CD32, and CD33 in THP-1 after PMP stimulation. These results suggest that high-shear-induced microparticles may contribute to the development of atherosclerosis and participate in vascular damage in inflammatory disorders.11583316
Platelet activation and platelet-erythrocyte aggregates in end-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis.
Sirolli V, Strizzi L, Di Stante S, Robuffo I, Procopio A, Bonomini M
Thrombosis and haemostasis
Activated platelets may engage in dynamic interplay with other blood cells. We examined the evidence for platelet activation and the formation of platelet-erythrocyte aggregates in chronic hemodialysis patients. Circulating activated platelets (P-selectin/CD63-positive platelets) were higher than normal controls (p < 0.001) and further increased during hemodialysis sessions, the increase being higher when patients were dialyzed with cellulosic than with synthetic membranes. We found direct evidence of uremic platelet-erythrocyte adherence in vitro and increased levels of circulating platelet-erythrocyte aggregates in dialysis patients, which represents a new observation in uremia. Platelet-erythrocyte aggregates were subject to further increase during hemodialysis, and again higher levels were found with cellulosic than synthetic membranes. This phenomenon was reproduced in vitro by both ADP and PAF, but not by either complement factor C3a or by heparin concentrations corresponding to those used for clinical hemodialysis. We conclude that platelet-erythrocyte aggregates occur in hemodialysis patients probably owing to a primary platelet activation mechanism.11579350
Uniform platelet activation exists before coronary stent implantation despite aspirin therapy.
Serebruany V L, Cummings C C, Malinin A I, Steinhubl S R, Gurbel P A
American heart journal
Platelets play an important role in the natural history of coronary artery disease. Enhanced platelet aggregation and receptor expression unquestionably occur after coronary stent implantation; however, the functional characteristics of platelets before stenting have not been fully elucidated.
Platelets were assessed before intervention by platelet-rich plasma aggregation (PA) with 5 mmol adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and 1 mg/mL collagen; whole blood aggregation (WBA) by 1 mg/mL collagen; shear-induced closure time (CT); contractile force (CF); and expression of 9 surface receptors by flow cytometry in 126 patients undergoing elective coronary artery stent placement. All patients received aspirin for at least 7 days. The data were compared with those from 64 healthy volunteers.
Each test revealed sustained platelet activation in patients undergoing coronary stenting compared with control values. These differences were significant for collagen-induced PA (P =.031); CF (P =.0001); expression of glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa (P =.0001); P-selectin (P =.0008); platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM)-1 (P =.0001); CD107a (P =.0001); CD107b (P =.0004); and CD63 (P =.009).
Platelets are indeed activated before coronary stenting despite antecedent therapy with aspirin.11576088
Basotest and suxamethonium allergy.
Aly Hassan I M, Crockard A D, Asghar M S, Edgar J D, Atkinson S
Allergy
11570623
IgE-mediated anaphylaxis after first intravenous infusion of cyclosporine.
Ebo D G, Piel G C, Conraads V, Stevens W J
Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology
Intravenous administration of cyclosporine, which contains Cremophor EL (a polyethoxylated castor oil; BASF, Berlin, Germany), has occasionally resulted in an anaphylactic reaction. An apparent hypersensitivity reaction (bronchospasm and decrease in blood pressure) had occurred during heart transplantation in a 59-year-old woman after intravenous infusion of cyclosporine. Subsequent oral administration of cyclosporine precipitated no reaction.
The purpose of this study was to attempt to ascertain the mechanism responsible for the anaphylactic reaction.
Hypersensitivity investigations, including total serum IgE and allergen-specific IgE quantifications, skin testing, and basophil activation tests by flow cytometric determination of CD63 upregulation were undertaken in the study patient and in two healthy control subjects who were free of medication.
The results of intradermal testing with Cremophor EL were positive after 15 minutes in the study patient only. Both cyclosporine and Cremophor EL induced considerable activation of the basophils from our study patient, with an upregulation of CD63 expression from 1% to 39% and 55%, respectively. In contrast, the expression of CD63 on basophils from the two control subjects remained essentially unchanged.
The negative investigative findings in the control subjects, the patient's clinical manifestations in temporal relationship to the infusion, her positive results on intradermal testing with Cremophor, the basophil activation test results, and her uneventful course after oral administration of cyclosporine strongly support the presence of IgE antibodies to Cremophor EL in our patient.11520080
Intracellular transport of MHC class II and associated invariant chain in antigen presenting cells from AP-3-deficient mocha mice.
Sevilla L M, Richter S S, Miller J
Cellular immunology
MHC class II-restricted antigen presentation requires trafficking of newly synthesized class II-invariant chain complexes from the trans-Golgi network to endosomal, peptide-loading compartments. This transport is mediated by dileucine-like motifs within the cytosolic tail of the invariant chain. Although these signals have been well characterized, the cytosolic proteins that interact with these dileucine signals and mediate Golgi sorting and endosomal transport have not been identified. Recently, an adaptor complex, AP-3, has been identified that interacts with dileucine motifs and mediates endosomal/lysosomal transport in yeast, Drosophila, and mammals. In this report, we have assessed class II-invariant chain trafficking in a strain of mice (mocha) which lacks expression of AP-3. Our studies demonstrate that the lack of AP-3 does not affect the kinetics of invariant chain degradation, the route of class II-invariant chain transport, or the rate and extent of class II-peptide binding as assessed by the generation of SDS-stable dimers. The possible role of other known or unknown adaptor complexes in class II-invariant chain transport is discussed.
Copyright 2001 Academic Press.11487543
Intestinal epithelial cells secrete exosome-like vesicles.
van Niel G, Raposo G, Candalh C, Boussac M, Hershberg R, Cerf-Bensussan N, Heyman M
Gastroenterology
Given the observations that intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) can present antigens to CD4(+) T lymphocytes and that professional antigen-presenting cells secrete exosomes (antigen-presenting vesicles), we hypothesized that IECs may secrete exosomes carrying molecules implicated in antigen presentation, which may be able to cross the basement membrane and convey immune information to noncontiguous immune cells.
Human IEC lines HT29-19A and T84-DRB1*0401/CIITA were grown on microporous filters. Release of exosomes under basal or inflammatory conditions was evaluated in conditioned apical and basolateral media after differential ultracentrifugations. Morphologic and biochemical characterization of exosomes was performed using immunoelectron microscopy, Western blotting, and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry.
The intestinal cell lines released 30-90-nm-diameter vesicles from the apical and basolateral sides, and this release was significantly increased in the presence of interferon gamma. MHC class I, MHC class II, CD63, CD26/dipeptidyl-peptidase IV, and A33 antigen were present in epithelial-derived exosomes. CONCLUSIONS; Human IEC lines secrete exosomes bearing accessory molecules that may be involved in antigen presentation. These data are consistent with a model in which IECs may influence antigen presentation in the mucosal or systemic immune system independent of direct cellular contact with effector cells.11487384
Whole blood microvolume laser scanning cytometry for monitoring resting and activated platelets.
Wyant T L, Smith P C, Brown B, Kantor A B
Platelets
Enumerating and phenotyping of platelets, resting and activated, from whole blood is important for both the identification and verification of many disease states. Microvolume laser scanning cytometry (MLSC) has been shown to be a simple method for enumerating and phenotyping peripheral blood cells. Here, the utility of MLSC, in conjunction with an anticoagulant containing platelet activation inhibitors, for simultaneously measuring platelet count, phenotype and responsiveness directly from non-fixed whole blood was examined. CTAD or EDTA anticoagulated blood was collected from five to 20 healthy volunteers, stained with fluorescence-labeled antibodies specific for platelet antigens, and run on an in-house modified MSLC device. MLSC was able to measure antigens CD9, CD29, CD36, CD41, CD42a, CD42b, and CD61 on platelets and determine an average of 2.3 x 10(5) +/- 7 x 10(4) platelets per microliter. Counts correlated well with those obtained from the Cell-Dyn 3500 (r(2)=0.84). Agreeing with previous data, less than 2% of platelets from peripheral blood of normal individuals expressed the activation markers CD62P or CD63. After in vitro thrombin activation, >93% of the platelets expressed activation markers. Data presented here shows the benefits of using MLSC in combination with platelet inhibitors to quantitate and phenotype platelets while maintaining a viable responsive state.11479292
Analysis of the CD151-alpha3beta1 integrin and CD151-tetraspanin interactions by mutagenesis.
Berditchevski F, Gilbert E, Griffiths M R, Fitter S, Ashman L, Jenner S J
The Journal of biological chemistry
Transmembrane proteins of the tetraspanin superfamily are associated with various integrins and modulate their function. We performed mutagenesis analysis to establish structural requirements for the interaction of CD151 with the alpha3beta1 integrin and with other tetraspanins. Using a panel of CD151/CD9 chimeras and CD151 deletion mutants we show that the minimal region, which confers stable (e.g. Triton X-100-resistant) association of the tetraspanin with alpha3beta1, maps within the large extracellular loop (LECL) of CD151 (the amino acid sequence between residues Leu(149) and Glu(213)). Furthermore, the substitution of 11 amino acids (residues 195-205) from this region for a corresponding sequence from CD9 LECL or point mutations of cysteines in the conserved CCG and PXXCC motifs abolish the interaction. The removal of the LECL CD151 does not affect the association of the protein with other tetraspanins (e.g. CD9, CD81, CD63, and wild-type CD151). On the other hand, the mutation of the CCG motif selectively prevents the homotypic CD151-CD151 interaction but does not influence the association of the mutagenized CD151 with other tetraspanins. These results demonstrate the differences in structural requirements for the heterotypic and homotypic tetraspanin-tetraspanin interactions. Various deletions involving the small extracellular loop and the first three transmembrane domains prevent surface expression of the CD151 mutants but do not affect the CD151-alpha3beta1 interaction. The CD151 deletion mutants are accumulated in the endoplasmic reticulum and redirected to the lysosomes. The assembly of the CD151-alpha3beta1 complex occurs early during the integrin biosynthesis and precedes the interaction of CD151 with other tetraspanins. Collectively, these data show that the incorporation of CD151 into the "tetraspanin web" can be controlled at various levels by different regions of the protein.11467990
Allergen-induced basophil activation: CD63 cell expression detected by flow cytometry in patients allergic to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and Lolium perenne.
Sanz M L, Sánchez G, Gamboa P M, Vila L, Uasuf C, Chazot M, Diéguez I, De Weck A L
Clinical and experimental allergy : journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology
In this study, we determined by flow cytometry the percentage of basophils activated after in vitro stimulation by allergens and expressing the CD63 marker. The diagnostic reliability of the technique was assessed as well as its correlation with other in vitro diagnostic parameters.
Fifty-three patients suffering from asthma and/or allergic rhinitis following sensitization to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and 51 patients sensitized to Lolium perenne were investigated. Twenty-four atopic patients not sensitive to these allergens and 38 healthy subjects were also selected as controls. The basophil activation test determines the percentage of basophils which express CD63 as an activation marker, by means of flow cytometry, after in vitro stimulation with allergen, using double labelling with monoclonal antibody anti-CD63-PE and anti-IgE-FITC.
No differences in basal values (non-activated control) were found between sensitized patients, atopic controls and healthy controls. On the other hand, sensitized patients showed a significantly higher percentage of activated basophils after stimulation by allergens in vitro than both control groups (P < 0.001). We found a significant correlation between skin tests and basophil activation tests (r = 0.72, P < 0.001). We also found a positive and significant correlation between basophil activation tests and histamine release tests (r = 0.80, P < 0.001), allergen-specific sulphidoleukotriene production (r = 0.7, P < 0.001) and the occurrence of serum allergen-specific IgE (r = 0.71, P < 0.001).
The basophil activation test is a highly reliable technique in the diagnosis of allergy to inhalant allergens. The sensitivity of the basophil activation test was 93.3%, and its specificity 98.4%, when using a cut-off point of 15% activated basophils as positive result.11452004
AP-3 mediates tyrosinase but not TRP-1 trafficking in human melanocytes.
Huizing M, Sarangarajan R, Strovel E, Zhao Y, Gahl W A, Boissy R E
Molecular biology of the cell
Patients with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS-2) have mutations in the beta 3A subunit of adaptor complex-3 (AP-3) and functional deficiency of this complex. AP-3 serves as a coat protein in the formation of new vesicles, including, apparently, the platelet's dense body and the melanocyte's melanosome. We used HPS-2 melanocytes in culture to determine the role of AP-3 in the trafficking of the melanogenic proteins tyrosinase and tyrosinase-related protein-1 (TRP-1). TRP-1 displayed a typical melanosomal pattern in both normal and HPS-2 melanocytes. In contrast, tyrosinase exhibited a melanosomal (i.e., perinuclear and dendritic) pattern in normal cells but only a perinuclear pattern in the HPS-2 melanocytes. In addition, tyrosinase exhibited a normal pattern of expression in HPS-2 melanocytes transfected with a cDNA encoding the beta 3A subunit of the AP-3 complex. This suggests a role for AP-3 in the normal trafficking of tyrosinase to premelanosomes, consistent with the presence of a dileucine recognition signal in the C-terminal portion of the tyrosinase molecule. In the AP-3-deficient cells, tyrosinase was also present in structures resembling late endosomes or multivesicular bodies; these vesicles contained exvaginations devoid of tyrosinase. This suggests that, under normal circumstances, AP-3 may act on multivesicular bodies to form tyrosinase-containing vesicles destined to fuse with premelanosomes. Finally, our studies demonstrate that tyrosinase and TRP-1 use different mechanisms to reach their premelanosomal destination.11447407
CD63 expression on basophils of nonallergic controls and patients allergic to wasp.
Schuerwegh A J, Ebo D G, Bridts C H, De Clerck L S, Stevens W J
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
11435209
Endocytosed SP-A and surfactant lipids are sorted to different organelles in rat type II pneumocytes.
Wissel H, Lehfeldt A, Klein P, Müller T, Stevens P A
American journal of physiology. Lung cellular and molecular physiology
Intracellular transport of endocytosed surfactant protein A (SP-A) and lipid was investigated in isolated rat type II cells. After internalization, SP-A and lipid are taken up via the coated-pit pathway and reside in a common compartment, positive for the early endosomal marker EEA1 but negative for the lamellar body marker 3C9. SP-A then recycles rapidly to the cell surface via Rab4-associated recycling vesicles. Internalized lipid is transported toward a Rab7-, CD63-, 3C9-positive compartment, i.e., lamellar bodies. Inhibition of calmodulin led to inhibition of uptake and transport out of the EEA1-positive endosome and thus of resecretion of both components. Inhibition of intravesicular acidification (bafilomycin A1) led to decreased uptake of both surfactant components. It inhibited transport out of early endosomes for lipid only, not for SP-A. We conclude that in type II cells, endocytosed SP-A and lipid are transported toward a common early endosomal compartment. Thereafter, both components dissociate. SP-A is rapidly recycled to the cell surface and does not enter classic lamellar bodies. Lipid is transported toward lamellar bodies.11422083
Unusual intracellular trafficking of Salmonella typhimurium in human melanoma cells.
Martínez-Lorenzo M J, Méresse S, de Chastellier C, Gorvel J P
Cellular microbiology
Salmonella spp. are enterobacteria capable of invading and replicating in both professional and non-professional phagocytes. Here, we investigate the fate of S. typhimurium in human melanoma MelJuSo cells. The bacterium entered MelJuSo cells by a trigger mechanism and resided within a unique organelle, the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV). The SCV acquired early endosomal markers transiently and then underwent a series of membrane modifications. In HeLa cells, vacuole maturation is characterized by the simultaneous acquisition of the lysosomal membrane glycoproteins (Lgps) Lamp1, CD63 and vacuolar (v)-ATPase; in MelJuSo cells, however, acquisition of CD63 and v-ATPase preceded that of Lamp1. A very striking event in MelJuSo cells was the arrest of bacterial septation starting from 8 h after infection. Bacteria nevertheless continued to elongate, remained morphologically intact and viable and were eventually exocytosed. This original feature was observed in several skin-related cells including melanocytes, suggesting that it may provide the basis for an efficient host defence mechanism against Salmonella infection.11411598
Flow-cytometric analysis of basophil activation: inhibition by histamine at conventional and homeopathic concentrations.
Brown V, Ennis M
Inflammation research : official journal of the European Histamine Research Society ... [et al.]
11373314
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (Acp 5): identification in diverse human tissues and dendritic cells.
Hayman A R, Macary P, Lehner P J, Cox T M
The journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry : official journal of the Histochemistry Society
Histochemical demonstration of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) is used for the specific identification of osteoclasts. The enzyme, which we have shown to be critical for normal bone development in mice, is also characteristic of monohistiocytes, including alveolar macrophages, and is associated with diverse pathological conditions such as Gaucher's disease and hairy cell leukemia. TRAP activity is enhanced in serum when bone resorption is increased, and the activity is used routinely to monitor treatment responses in Gaucher's disease. We have lately shown widespread expression of the enzyme in murine tissues with particular reference to the skin, thymus, gut epithelia, and isolated dendritic cells, suggesting a possible role in immunity. To further clarify the significance of TRAP in human physiology, we have examined its distribution in non-skeletal human tissues and in CD34+ -derived human dendritic cells. TRAP mRNA determined by Northern blotting analysis was expressed abundantly in spleen, liver, colon, lung, small intestine, kidney, stomach, testis, placenta, lymph node, thymus, peripheral blood leukocyte, bone marrow, and fetal liver. Expression of TRAP protein was investigated by immunohistochemistry, with which the enzyme was identified in multiple tissues. Histochemical staining detected enzymatically active protein in spleen, lung, skin, colon, stomach, and ileum. Active TRAP was identified in CD34+ -derived immature dendritic cells and co-localized to intracellular CD63 positive organelles. When these cells were matured by induction with LPS, the TRAP activity increased fivefold and remained within the cell during the phase associated with CD63 surface expression. Our findings demonstrate widespread expression of TRAP in human tissues. Its abundant expression in epithelia and dendritic cells suggests a potential role in antigen processing and in immune responses.11371226
Renal angiomyolipoma: further immunophenotypic characterization of an expanding morphologic spectrum.
Stone C H, Lee M W, Amin M B, Yaziji H, Gown A M, Ro J Y, Têtu B, Paraf F, Zarbo R J
Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine
Renal angiomyolipoma is a benign tumor histologically characterized by proliferation of spindle cells, epithelioid cells, and adipocytic cells in concert with many thick-walled blood vessels. To add further diagnostic confusion, an epithelioid cell-predominant variant of renal angiomyolipoma has recently been described. HMB-45 immunoreactivity correlates with ultrastructural striated organelles that closely resemble premelanosomes, although no evidence of melanogenesis has been documented in this tumor.
To further characterize the immunophenotypic and ultrastructural profile of renal angiomyolipoma based on phenotypic cell type (epithelioid, spindle, and adipocytic cell).
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues from 27 renal angiomyolipomas and 8 renal cell carcinomas were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies to the melanoma-associated antigens HMB-45, HMB-50, NKI/C3 (CD63), and tyrosinase; the smooth muscle-related antigens calponin and muscle-specific actin (HHF-35); S100; and cytokeratin (CK). All renal angiomyolipomas were also immunostained with a polyclonal antibody to renin. Ultrastructural examination was performed on 9 selected cases.
All renal angiomyolipomas stained positive for HMB-45, HMB-50, NKI/C3, muscle-specific actin (HHF-35), and calponin. Overall, HMB-45, HMB-50, and NKI/C3 preferentially stained the epithelioid cells. Tyrosinase staining was present in 50% of the renal angiomyolipomas with adequate tissue for staining (12 of 24 cases); positive staining and intensity paralleled HMB-45, HMB-50, and NKI/C3. Muscle-specific actin (HHF-35) and calponin preferentially stained the spindle cells. The adipocytic cells stained positive for both melanoma-associated antigens and smooth muscle antigens. Epithelioid cells, spindle cells, and adipocytic cells were CK, S100, and renin negative. Ultrastructural findings paralleled immunohistochemical staining patterns. Premelanosome-like organelles and electron dense granules were more readily detected in the epithelioid cells within the tumor, whereas ultrastructural characteristics of smooth muscle cells were more easily found in the spindle cells. All renal cell carcinomas stained positive for CK, NKI/C3 staining was variable, and all were negative for HMB-45, HMB-50, smooth muscle actin (HHF-35), and calponin.
In renal angiomyolipoma, the epithelioid and spindle cells have preferential staining patterns for melanoma-associated antigens versus smooth muscle antigens, respectively. Positivity in renal angiomyolipoma for HMB-50, NKI/C3, and tyrosinase, in addition to HMB-45, provides evidence for the presence of different melanoma-associated gene products. Immunophenotypic overlap of the 3 histologically distinct renal angiomyolipoma cell populations suggests a common cell line, supporting a unitarian concept for renal angiomyolipoma. Ultrastructural characteristics of the 3 renal angiomyolipoma cell phenotypes parallel the immunophenotype, giving further support to a common cell line. Our study lends further credence to the perivascular epithelioid cell concept as proposed by Bonetti and colleagues.11370743
Re-localization of activated EGF receptor and its signal transducers to multivesicular compartments downstream of early endosomes in response to EGF.
Oksvold M P, Skarpen E, Wierød L, Paulsen R E, Huitfeldt H S
European journal of cell biology
The rapid internalization of receptor tyrosine kinases after ligand binding has been assumed to be a negative modulation of signal transduction. However, accumulating data indicate that signal transduction from internalized cell surface receptors also occurs from endosomes. We show that a substantial fraction of tyrosine-phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Shc, Grb2 and Cbl after internalization relocates from early endosomes to compartments which are negative for the early endosomes, recycling vesicle markers EEA1 and transferrin in EGF-stimulated cells. These compartments contained the multivesicular body and late endosome marker CD63, and the late endosome and lysosome marker LAMP-1, and showed a multivesicular morphology. Subcellular fractionation revealed that activated EGFR, adaptor proteins and activated ERK 1 and 2 were located in EEA1-negative and LAMP-1-positive fractions. Co-immunoprecipitations showed EGFR in complex with both Shc, Grb2 and Cbl. Treatment with the weak base chloroquine or inhibitors of lysosomal enzymes after EGF stimulation induced an accumulation of tyrosine-phosphorylated EGFR and Shc in EEA1-negative and CD63-positive vesicles after a 120-min chase period. This was accompanied by a sustained activation of ERK 1 and 2. These results suggest that EGFR signaling is not spatially restricted to the plasma membrane, primary vesicles and early endosomes, but is continuing from late endocytic trafficking organelles maturing from early endosomes.11350309
Basophil activation during pollen season in patients monosensitized to grass pollens.
Saporta M, Kamei S, Persi L, Bousquet J, Arnoux B
Allergy
Basotest is a new basophil-activation test based upon the expression of CD63 (gp53) in the presence of allergens. It is an effective diagnostic test for pollen-allergic patients. However, it is not known whether Basotest results differ during the pollen season.
We examined the activation of basophils by Basotest in 13 patients sensitized only to grass pollen, before and during the pollen season, in order to assess whether Basotest could be used as a diagnostic test during the pollen season. Dose-response curves with 10-fold increasing concentrations of timothy grass pollen (10-4 to 100 AU) were carried out.
Basophils were not activated spontaneously during the pollen season since the CD63 expression was below detectable levels before in vitro cell activation. A decreased percentage of activated basophils at the peak of activation was found in comparing the pre- and in-season tests, but all patients had a positive test. When basophil activation was at its peak, the allergen concentration was similar during the two periods. Moreover, the median area under the curve was significantly (P < 0.02) reduced during the season as compared to before the season.
Basotest can therefore be used as a diagnostic test during the pollen season, but the allergen exposure needs to be characterized if quantitative studies are performed.11344351
Mass, charge, and subcellular localization of a unique secretory product identified by the basophil-specific antibody BB1.
McEuen A R, Calafat J, Compton S J, Easom N J, Buckley M G, Knol E F, Walls A F
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
BB1 is a basophil-specific mAb (Lab Invest 1999;79:27-38). The identity of the corresponding antigen has not been determined, but it gives a granular appearance on staining and is secreted on activation of basophils.
We sought to further characterize the basophilspecific antigen identified by BB1.
Intracellular localization was determined by flow cytometry and by immunogold labeling and electron microscopy. Physical chemical properties were investigated by gel filtration chromatography and preparative isoelectric focusing.
In flow cytometry, permeabilization of cells increased immunofluorescence 100-fold, confirming the predominantly intracellular localization of the antigen. It was further localized to the secretory granules by immunoelectron microscopy. Double labeling with a CD63-specific antibody demonstrated selective binding of BB1 to the granule matrix. Gel filtration chromatography indicated that the antigen is secreted as a complex of approximately 5 x 10(6) d, which was well resolved from the 210-kd supramolecular complex containing tryptase. The antigen was degraded by pronase. Isoelectric focusing indicated a highly basic protein with an isoelectric point of 9.6.
With its granule localization, release on cell activation, and unique properties, the antigen identified by BB1 could be a novel mediator of allergic disease. We propose the name basogranulin for this novel basophil-specific protein.11342208
Association of whole blood aggregation response with immunogold-labeled glycoproteins in adult and neonatal platelets.
Saving K L, Mankin P, Maragos J, Adams D, Caughy R
Thrombosis research
A growing body of recent data has provided specifics about the hemostatic system in infants, emphasizing differences from adults. Although platelet structure in newborns and adults appears to be quite similar, precise information about platelets in the first week of life indicates functional hyporeactiveness. This study was designed with a twofold purpose: one was to determine if aggregation results corresponded to immunogold-labeled activation markers; the second was to use immunogold labeling to determine if infant platelets circulate in an activated state. The results showed significant differences in ristocetin (P = .03) and collagen (P = .003) impedance, and whole blood aggregation lag times in infants when compared to adults. Treatment of neonatal platelets with collagen yielded decreased ATP release compared with adults. Immunogold labeling of specific activation markers CD62 (P-selectin) and CD63 (GP53) revealed that neonatal platelets were not circulating in an activated state. Significant (P = .04) anti-CD41 (GPIIb) immunogold labeling differences were observed after thrombin stimulation, with adults binding more particles. These data suggest that hyporeactivity of neonatal platelets is not due to a circulating preactivated state, but instead may be a consequence of impaired intracellular signaling that affects both aggregation and membrane activation labeling. Whether this signaling is secondary to an intrinsic neonatal alteration or a maternal (in utero) environmental effect is yet to be determined.11328596
Dynamics of intracellular granules with CD63-GFP in rat basophilic leukemia cells.
Amano T, Furuno T, Hirashima N, Ohyama N, Nakanishi M
Journal of biochemistry
CD63 is located on the basophilic granule membranes in resting basophils, mast cells, and platelets, and is also located on the plasma membranes of the cells. We constructed a CD63-GFP (green fluorescent protein) plasmid and introduced it into rat basophilic leukemia (RBL-2H3) cells to observe the movements of CD63 on degranulation. The movements of CD63-GFP were studied in living RBL cells by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). CD63-GFP, in which GFP was conjugated to the C-terminus of CD63, was located on both the granule membranes and the plasma membranes of RBL cells. The diameter of the fluorescent granules in the cytoplasm varied from 0.5 to 1.5 microm. Before antigen stimulation most granules with CD63-GFP hardly moved in RBL cells. However, after antigen stimulation the plasma membranes ruffled violently and the granules moved dramatically. They reached the plasma membranes in a few minutes and fused with them instantaneously. Analysis of the movement of each granule provided a new insight into the elementary process of degranulation. The velocity of the granule movement toward the plasma membranes on antigen stimulation was calculated to be 0.1+/-0.02 microm/s. This shows that the granules are able to reach the plasma membranes in 2 or 3 min if the diameter of the cells is 20 microm.11297035
Platelet CD40 ligand (CD40L)--subcellular localization, regulation of expression, and inhibition by clopidogrel.
Hermann A, Rauch B H, Braun M, Schrör K, Weber A A
Platelets
This study compares the subcellular localization and the regulation of expression of the platelet activation markers CD62P and CD63 with CD40 ligand (CD40L) on the surface of washed human platelets. CD40L was expressed upon stimulation with a wide range of platelet activators. However, quantitative flow cytometry demonstrated that, as compared with CD62P and CD63, CD40L expression was low. Upon stimulation with thrombin receptor-activating peptide (TRAP-6), all activation markers were expressed. In contrast, upon stimulation with low concentrations of collagen (1-3 microg/ml), CD40L, but not the granule proteins (CD62P, CD63), were expressed. Using immunofluorescence microscopy, a cytoplasmic staining was observed for CD40L, and cytoplasmic localization of CD40L was verified by Western blotting of subcellular platelet fractions. The staining of CD40L was different from that of filamentous actin and only little association of CD40L with platelet cytoskeleton was found. Surface expression of CD40L was dependent on internal Ca2+ stores and protein kinase C, while the mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERK, p38) or tyrosine kinases were not involved. ADP (30 microM)-induced CD40L expression was not inhibited by aspirin. In contrast, clopidogrel treatment completely abolished ADP-induced expression of CD40L. Finally, the expression level of CD40L was shown to be upregulated by phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) in the promegakaryocytic cell line MEG-01.11295657
Fusion protein vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 is implicated in IFN-gamma-induced piecemeal degranulation in human eosinophils from atopic individuals.
Lacy P, Logan M R, Bablitz B, Moqbel R
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
Exocytosis is an integral event during IFN-gamma-induced piecemeal degranulation in eosinophils. In many tissues soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs), including vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP), act as specific intracellular receptors to allow granule fusion with the membrane during degranulation. However, the mechanisms underlying eosinophil piecemeal degranulation induced by IFN-gamma are not well understood.
We sought to assess whether eosinophils express the vesicular SNARE protein VAMP-2 and to determine the involvement of VAMP-2 in IFN-gamma-induced piecemeal degranulation.
Human peripheral blood eosinophils (> or =97%) from atopic subjects were subjected to RT-PCR and sequence analysis with specific primers for VAMP-2 mRNA. Western blotting and flow cytometric analysis were carried out to confirm the identity of VAMP-2 and its susceptibility to cleavage by tetanus toxin. Confocal laser scanning microscopy imaging was conducted on double-labeled cytospin preparations of eosinophils at 0, 5, 10, 30, and 60 minutes and 16 hours of IFN-gamma (500 U/mL) stimulation.
Eosinophils expressed VAMP-2 mRNA (n = 4 donors), which exhibited 100% homology with human VAMP-2 cDNA on sequencing. Eosinophils were also found to express tetanus toxin-sensitive VAMP-2 protein. RANTES and VAMP-2 immunofluorescence were observed to colocalize to similar intracellular structures by means of confocal imaging. IFN-gamma induced a rapid translocation of VAMP-2(+) organelles toward the cell membrane in correlation with RANTES.
These findings suggest that exocytosis in human eosinophils is regulated by SNAREs, with a specific role indicated for VAMP-2 in piecemeal degranulation.11292194
Effect of bezafibrate on soluble adhesion molecules and platelet activation markers in patients with connective tissue diseases and secondary hyperlipidemia.
Kagawa H, Nomura S, Nagahama M, Ozaki Y, Fukuhara S
Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
We evaluated the plasma concentrations of soluble adhesion molecules, platelet activation markers, and platelet-derived microparticles (PMPs) in patients with connective tissue diseases who had secondary hyperlipidemia caused by long-term steroid administration (n = 22) before and after treatment with bezafibrate. There were differences in levels of platelet activation markers both before and after treatment (platelet CD62p: 15.11+/-2.03 vs 10.38+/-8.53%, P < 0.05; platelet CD63: 12.12+/-9.17 vs 9.90+/-7.20%, P < 0.05). There were also differences in the levels of PMPs and soluble adhesion molecules both before and after treatment (PMP: 514+/-273 vs 401+/-201 /10(4) platelet. P < 0.05; soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1: 724+/-191 vs 666+/-157 ng/mL, P < 0.01). After 6 months of treatment, serum lipid concentrations were reduced by 9% for total cholesterol (TC) and 32% for triglyceride (TG). The level of PMPs, activated platelets, and soluble adhesion molecules were all significantly decreased after treatment with bezafibrate. These findings suggest that bezafibrate may be useful for inhibiting both PMP-dependent and -independent vascular damage in patients with connective tissue diseases complaining of secondary hyperlipidemia.11292030
Variable expression of activation-linked surface antigens on human mast cells in health and disease.
Valent P, Schernthaner G H, Sperr W R, Fritsch G, Agis H, Willheim M, Bühring H J, Orfao A, Escribano L
Immunological reviews
Mast cells (MC) are multipotent effector cells of the immune system. They contain an array of biologically active mediator substances in their granules. MC also express a number of functionally important cell surface antigens, including stem cell factor receptor (SCFR=kit=CD117), high affinity IgER (FcepsilonRI), or CSaR (CD88). Respective ligands can induce or promote degranulation, migration, or cytokine production. Other integral surface molecules can mediate adhesion or cell aggregation. Recent data suggest that a number of critical molecules are variably expressed on the surface of human MC. In fact, depending on the environment (organ), stage of cell maturation, type of disease, and other factors, MC express variable amounts of activation-linked antigens (CD25, CD63, CD69, CD88), cell recognition molecules (CD2, CD11, CD18, CD50, CD54), or cytokine receptors. At present, however, little is known about the mechanisms and regulation of expression of such antigens. The present article gives an overview of MC phenotypes in health and disease, and attempts to provide explanations for the phenotypic variability of MC.11291427
Profound inhibition of GPIb, GPIIb/IIIa, PECAM-1, CD63, and CD107 in a chronic drug addict: selecting controls for platelet flow cytometry in the inner city hospital.
Bell C R, Horowitz E D, Oshrine B R, Serebruany V L
Thrombosis research
11289709
Cigarette smoking as an aggravating factor in inflammatory tissue-destructive diseases. Increase in tumor necrosis Factor-alpha priming of peripheral neutrophils measured as generation of oxygen radicals.
Gustafsson A, Asman B, Bergström K
International journal of clinical & laboratory research
Stimulated neutrophils from subjects with various inflammatory tissue-destructive conditions, such as periodontal, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and cardiovascular diseases, generate more oxygen radicals and proteases, implicated in tissue destruction, than neutrophils from healthy persons. Cigarette smoking aggravates these diseases. The aim of our study was to investigate the effect of cigarette smoking on the priming capacity of tumor necrosis factor-alpha, measured as generation of radicals from stimulated neutrophils, in smoking and non-smoking subjects with or without periodontitis. The priming effect was higher in neutrophils from smokers. In the group with periodontitis, smoking caused an even greater increase in the generation of radicals, indicating an additive effect of this local disease. The membrane expression of CD11b, CD15, and CD63 was significantly higher on neutrophils from smokers, indicating upregulated neutrophil functions. This increased priming effect of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in smokers subjects could be of importance in the aggravation of tissue-destructive inflammatory diseases.11260525
Intracellular distribution and late endosomal effects of the ocular albinism type 1 gene product: consequences of disease-causing mutations and implications for melanosome biogenesis.
Shen B, Rosenberg B, Orlow S J
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
To investigate the function of ocular albinism type 1 (OA1), the gene responsible for X-linked ocular albinism, we employed a construct containing murine Oa1 fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP) in a heterologous COS cell expression system. The cellular distribution of wild-type (WT) Oa1 protein and Oa1 proteins reflecting mutations causing X-linked ocular albinism were examined. Comparison with different organelle markers revealed that Oa1-GFP localized to the late endolysosomal compartments. Some Oa1 mutant proteins failed to exit the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Class I mutants), while other mutants partially (Class II mutants) or fully (Class III mutants) exited the ER and trafficked to endolysosomal compartments. We observed that expression of WT Oa1-GFP in COS cells caused an apparent enlargement of late endosomes and a redistribution of the mannose-6-phosphate receptor (M6PR). None of the mutants displayed the full range of effects on the redistribution of M6PR exhibited by WT Oa1. The effects of Oa1 on late endosome structure and content are thus likely to reflect an important biological property of Oa1. We propose that OA1 is involved in reorganizing the endolysosomal compartment as a necessary step in ocular melanosome biogenesis.11253475
[Blood platelet activation markers in patients with acute cerebral infarction during the earliest stage of the disease--evaluation using flow cytometry methods].
Belniak-Legieć E, Stelmasiak Z
Neurologia i neurochirurgia polska
Platelet activation seems to play a critical role in a number of vascular diseases, including stroke. The aim of our study was whole-blood flow cytometry evaluation of platelet activation markers: P-selectin (CD62), glycoprotein-53 (CD63) and platelet-derived microparticle in vivo in patients with acute cerebral infarction. We investigated 50 patients (29 men and 21 women, mean age 67.8) with acute cerebral infarction. Parameters of platelet activation were measured on the 1st, 3rd and 7th day after stroke onset. Comparisons were made with 20 control patients matched age. Compared to controls (1.6 +/- 0.7%) the stroke patients showed higher expression of CD62 on the 1st (2.6 +/- 1.4%), 3rd (3.5 +/- 2.3%) and 7th (3.0 +/- 2.0%) day after stroke onset. The differences were statistically significant on all days (p < 0.05). Compared to controls (1.5 +/- 0.6%) the stroke patients had also higher expression of CD63 on the 1st (1.9 +/- 0.6%), 3rd (2.0 +/- 0.6%) day and they showed higher level of platelet-derived microparticles on the 3rd (13.0 +/- 3.0%) day after stroke onset. The differences were statistically significant (p < 0.05). Elevated expression of CD62, CD63 and platelet-derived microparticles level indicate platelet activation during the acute phase of ischaemic stroke. Flow cytometry is a useful tool for in vivo assessment of platelet activation.11246228
Synthesis and processing of apolipoprotein E in human brain cultures.
Dekroon R M, Armati P J
Glia
Apolipoprotein E (apoE) plays a role in the distribution of lipid within many organs and cell types in the human body, including neurons and astrocytes of the central nervous system (CNS). The apoE4 isoform is also a genetic risk factor for late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the mechanism by which apoE is involved in AD is largely unknown. In order to understand how apoE is involved in the distribution of lipid in the CNS, we sought to investigate not only the origin of intraneuronal apoE, but the pathway by which it is processed once synthesized. We have established that human neurons can synthesize apoE in the presence of astrocytes, and that intracellular neuronal apoE is processed through the rough endoplasmic reticulum, golgi, and CD63-positive lysosomes where it may be stored before secretion. Our results also suggest that apoE synthesis is regulated by a feedback mechanism, controlled by the neuron itself. This regulatory mechanism may be essential to the maintenance of neuronal cholesterol concentrations and in turn membrane stability.
Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.11235900
Domain analysis of the tetraspanins: studies of CD9/CD63 chimeric molecules on subcellular localization and upregulation activity for diphtheria toxin binding.
Ryu F, Takahashi T, Nakamura K, Takahashi Y, Kobayashi T, Shida S, Kameyama T, Mekada E
Cell structure and function
CD9 and CD63 belong to a tetramembrane-spanning glycoprotein family called tetraspanin, and are involved in a wide variety of cellular processes, but the structure-function relationship of this family of proteins has yet to be clarified. CD9 associates with diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR), which is identical to the membrane-anchored form of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (proHB-EGF). CD9 upregulates the diphtheria toxin (DT) binding activity of DTR/proHB-EGF, while CD63 does not upregulate the DT binding activity in spite of the fact that this protein also associates with DTR/proHB-EGF on the cell surface. CD9 molecules localize on the cell surface, while those of CD63 localize predominantly at lysosomes and intracellular compartments. We made CD9/CD63 chimeric molecules and then studied their intracellular localization and upregulation activities. The C-terminal regions of CD63, which includes the lysosome sorting motif, showed a strong inhibitory effect on the expression of the chimeric proteins at the cell surface, while mutants lacking the lysosome sorting motif delivered more efficiently on the cell surface, indicating that the lysosome sorting motif contributes to the inhibitory effect of the C-terminal region. However, the N-terminal half of this family of proteins containing the 1st to 3rd transmembrane domains also seems to influence the cell surface expression. For the upregulation of DT binding activity the large extracellular loop (EC2) of CD9 was essential, while the remaining regions influenced the upregulation activity by changing the efficiency of cell surface expression. From these results we discussed the structure-function relationship of this family of proteins.11204565
CD63 associates with the alphaIIb beta3 integrin-CD9 complex on the surface of activated platelets.
Israels S J, McMillan-Ward E M, Easton J, Robertson C, McNicol A
Thrombosis and haemostasis
The tetraspanins are integral membrane proteins expressed on cell surface and granular membranes of hematopoietic cells and have been identified in multi-molecular complexes with specific integrins. In resting platelets, CD63, a member of the tetraspanin superfamily, is present in dense granule and lysosomal membranes and, following platelet activation, translocates to the plasma membrane. In the present study, platelet activation by thrombin leads to incorporation of CD63 into the Triton-insoluble actin cytoskeletal fraction. This incorporation was inhibited by preincubation of platelets with RGDS or EGTA and did not occur in platelets from a patient with Glanzmann's thrombasthenia, suggesting that it was dependent upon alphaIIbbeta3. In activated platelets, the anti-CD63 MoAb, D545, co-immunoprecipitated CD63 with other surface-labeled proteins, including alphaIIbbeta3 and another tetraspanin, CD9. The association of CD63 with CD9 and alphaIIbbeta3, was not inhibited by preincubation of platelets with RGDS or EGTA. D545 did not inhibit the adhesion of activated platelets to purified extracellular matrix proteins, but significantly decreased adhesion of thrombin-activated platelets to neutrophils in a rosetting assay. D545 also caused disaggregation of platelets stimulated by ADP, but had no effect on aggregation induced by other agonists. These results are consistent with the proposal that CD63 becomes part of an alphaIIbbeta3-CD9-CD63 integrin-tetraspanin complex in activated platelets--an association that may modulate the function of alphaIIbbeta3-dependent interaction with other cells such as neutrophils.11194377
Endothelial cell and stromal antigens in human periapical granulation tissue.
Taşman F, Dağdeviren A, Kendir B, Er N, Ataç A
Journal of endodontics
Periapical granulation tissue consists of vasculature of varying sizes and types, infiltrating cells, and other stromal elements. We examined the differential expression of endothelial and stroma antigens in this tissue to determine their tissue distribution in order to obtain hints on their functions. Some of the antigens examined were present only in the endothelial lining of vasculature, including high endothelial venules (e.g. CD31 and CD105), whereas others were more widely expressed by both vascular and stromal elements (e.g. CD29, CD63, CD44, and CD151). Immunohistochemical analysis using monoclonal antibodies specific to certain tissue compartments revealed the tissue architecture more precisely and the expression of certain antigens in the tissue suggested special roles for these antigens. Tissue distribution of CD63, CD143, CD147, and CD151 in periapical granulation tissue is first reported in the present study.11208068
Weibel-Palade body membrane proteins exhibit differential trafficking after exocytosis in endothelial cells.
Arribas M, Cutler D F
Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)
Weibel-Palade bodies, the secretory granules of endothelial cells, possess two different membrane proteins. However, P-selectin is seen only in Weibel-Palade bodies in HUVECs, whereas CD63 is also seen in late endosomes/lysosomes. Since P-selectin is targeted to lysosomes in heterologous expression studies, we have determined whether a lysosomal targeting signal also operates within HUVECs. We have also examined the trafficking of CD63 to its two different intracellular locations. By following antibodies bound at the plasma membrane during stimulation, we have discovered that while half of the P-selectin recycles to the WPBs, 50% is rapidly delivered to a lamp-1-positive compartment. Thus, the lysosomal targeting signal of this protein also operates in HUVECs. CD63 is found constitutively at the cell surface of HUVECs and most of it is delivered to the late endosomes/lysosomes after internalisation. However, stimulation causes both a rise in the CD63 plasma membrane level and in the amount that recycles to the WPBs. Our data strongly suggest that the CD63 that originates in the WPB preferentially recycles to the granule rather than being delivered to the late endosome/lysosome, and that there are, therefore, two separate pools of this protein within HUVECs. Our findings indicate that although P-selectin and CD63 are both targeted to the same compartments from the PM, the kinetics and the ratio of their targeting to Weibel-Palade bodies versus lysosomes are very different.11207556
Characterization and intracellular trafficking pattern of vacuoles containing Chlamydia pneumoniae in human epithelial cells.
Al-Younes H M, Rudel T, Meyer T F
Cellular microbiology
Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular pathogens that reside within a membrane-bound vacuole throughout their developmental cycle. In this study, the intraphagosomal pH of Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cpn) was qualitatively assessed, and the intracellular fate of the pathogen-containing vacuole and its interaction with endocytic organelles in human epithelial cells were analysed using conventional immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. The pH-sensitive probes acridine orange (AO), LysoTracker (LyT) and DAMP did not accumulate in the bacterial inclusion. In addition, exposure of cells to bafilomycin A1(BafA1), a potent acidification inhibitor, did not inhibit or delay chlamydial growth. The chlamydial compartment was not accessible to the fluid-phase tracer Texas Red (TR)-dextran and did not exhibit any level of staining for the late endosomal marker cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor (Ci-M6PR) or for the lysosomal-associated membrane proteins (LAMP-1 and -2) and CD63. In addition, transferrin receptor (TfR)-enriched vesicles were observed close to Cpn vacuoles, potentially indicating a specific translocation of these organelles through the cytoplasm to the vicinity of the vacuole. We conclude that Cpn, like other chlamydial spp., circumvents the host endocytic pathway and inhabits a non-acidic vacuole, which is dissociated from late endosomes and lysosomes, but selectively accumulates early endosomes.11181182
Modulation of MHC class II transport and lysosome distribution by macrophage-colony stimulating factor in human dendritic cells derived from monocytes.
Baron C, Raposo G, Scholl S M, Bausinger H, Tenza D, Bohbot A, Pouillart P, Goud B, Hanau D, Salamero J
Journal of cell science
The macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) has been already shown to affect the function of dendritic cells (DC). Therefore, the differentiation of dendritic cells into macrophages (M(PHI)) might represent a pathway which could inhibit the immune response initiated by DC. Because Major Histocompatibility Complex class II molecules (MHC-II) are crucial for DC function, we asked whether M-CSF may influence the intracellular transport of MHC-II in monocyte derived DC. We found that, at early stages, M-CSF induced first a rapid redistribution of MHC-II from the MHC-II containing compartments (MIIC) to the plasma membrane and second an increase in MHC-II synthesis as observed with LPS or TNF-(alpha). These processes were associated with the sorting of MHC-II from lysosomal membranes which underwent a drastic structural reorganization. However, in contrast to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-(alpha) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS), M-CSF neither potentiated the allostimulatory function of DC nor allowed the stabilization of MHC-II at the cell surface, but rather increased MHC-II turnover. We conclude that the rapid modulation of MHC-II transport and distribution may participate in the inhibitory effect of M-CSF on DC function and differentiation.11162242
The endosomal trafficking of apolipoprotein E3 and E4 in cultured human brain neurons and astrocytes.
DeKroon R M, Armati P J
Neurobiology of disease
The association of the E4 isoform of apolipoprotein E (apoE) as a genetic risk factor for late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been well established. Central nervous system (CNS) neurons are specifically affected so that defining the mechanisms by which two of the major human apoE isoforms act within CNS neurons is important to our understanding of their effect on neuronal maintenance and function. We have developed a cell culture model using human brain tissue to characterize exogenous apoE transport. We have tracked the association of apoE3 and E4 with CD63, the GTP-binding protein rab5a and the acidic hydrolase cathepsin D, which localize lysosomes, early endosomes, and late endosomes/lysosomes, respectively. Double immunostaining and confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed by z-series that after 30 min most intraneuronal apoE colocalized with rab5a, whereas no astrocyte apoE/rab5a colocalization was detected. Conversely, apoE3 and CD63 did not colocalize in neurons, even after 1 h, but was colocalized in astrocytes. Also, there was approximately 9% apoE3 colocalization with cathepsin D in neurons, whereas up to 87% of apoE4 vesicles were colocalized. In astrocytes, the proportion of apoE3 colocalized with cathepsin D was greater than that in neurons, but still significantly different from that found with apoE4. These immunohistological data demonstrate that, in neurons, apoE can be endocytosed via a rab5a-regulated vesicle-mediated pathway and that beyond this stage there may be isoform specific differences in apoE trafficking present in both neurons and astrocytes.
Copyright 2001 Academic Press.11157846
Association of distinct tetraspanins with MHC class II molecules at different subcellular locations in human immature dendritic cells.
Engering A, Pieters J
International immunology
Dendritic cells have the capacity to trigger T cell responses in lymphoid organs against antigens captured in the periphery. T cell stimulation depends on the ability of MHC class II molecules to present peptides at the cell surface that are acquired in MHC class II compartments. The high capacity of dendritic cells to stimulate T lymphocytes is related to their ability to regulate the distribution of MHC class II molecules intracellularly. To analyze the molecular components involved in the generation of MHC class II-peptide complexes in human immature dendritic cells, mAb were raised against purified MHC class II compartments. One of the antigens turned out to be CD63, a member of the tetraspanin superfamily. CD63 localized exclusively intracellularly where it associated with peptide-loaded class II molecules. In contrast, the tetraspanins CD9, CD53 and CD81 associated with class II molecules at the plasma membrane. Selective association of distinct tetraspanins may be involved in the regulation of MHC class II distribution in human dendritic cells.10752689
The bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) is membrane-associated in azurophil granules of human neutrophils, and relocation occurs upon cellular activation.
Calafat J, Janssen H, Knol E F, Malm J, Egesten A
APMIS : acta pathologica, microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica
Neutrophilic granulocytes contain the 55 kDa bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI). BPI binds to lipopolysaccharides (LPS), and exerts bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects against a wide variety of Gram-negative bacterial species. We have investigated the subcellular location of BPI in immature and mature neutrophils using cryotechnique for immunoelectron microscopy. BPI was found to colocate with myeloperoxidase (MPO), a marker for azurophil granules, and it also showed the same pattern of distribution as CD63, a transmembrane-anchored protein. This suggests that BPI is membrane-associated in the azurophil granules in neutrophils. Its presence in azurophil granules was further confirmed by the finding of BPI in the azurophil granules of neutrophil promyelocytes of the bone marrow. Induction of selective release of azurophilic granules by the Na-ionophore monensin resulted in fusion of endosomes with azurophil granules, leading to the formation of large vacuoles containing MPO, CD63, and BPI. After phagocytosis of serum-treated zymosan (STZ), BPI was detected in phagosomes, both in association with membranes as well as in the lumen, suggesting the release of BPI into activated compartments. The results show that BPI is present in azurophil granules, is probably primarily membrane-associated, and is relocated after activation, following the same route as MPO and CD63.11150547
Analysis of antigen presenting cell derived exosomes, based on immuno-magnetic isolation and flow cytometry.
Clayton A, Court J, Navabi H, Adams M, Mason M D, Hobot J A, Newman G R, Jasani B
Journal of immunological methods
We present a simple yet powerful method for the isolation and analysis of exosomes released by antigen-presenting cells (APC). Exosomes are small vesicles (40-90 nm) released by APC, and may have an immuno-regulatory function in vivo. Such exosomes originate from MHC class II peptide loading compartments and, as such, express high levels of MHC Class II. We have utilised magnetic beads, coated with monoclonal antibodies specific for HLA DP, DQ, DR for the specific isolation of exosomes from cell-free supernatants. Beads coated with exosomes are subsequently stained with conjugated antibodies, and analysed by flow cytometry. Characterisation of exosomes by this method demonstrated that exosomes derived from B-lymphocytes express abundant MHC Class I and II molecules. Other immunologically important molecules detected included the co-stimulatory molecules B7.1 (CD80) and B7.2 (CD86). The adhesion molecule ICAM-1 (CD54) was also detected. These exosomes also expressed the B cell marker CD20, and the complement inhibitory protein CD59. The expression of CD63, a lysosomal marker, was variable, and there was no detectable expression of transferrin receptor (CD71). Monocyte derived dendritic cells (cultured for 7 days in GM-CSF/IL-4), demonstrated an immature phenotype, and secreted exosomes with a similar phenotype, with abundant MHC molecules. The expression of CD63 was consistently strong, and the MHC Class I-like molecule CD1a was also present, suggesting a possible function in the presentation of lipid antigens. Again CD59 was expressed suggesting a possible role for APC exosomes in complement regulation. There was no detectable CD71, CD40, CD14, CD20 or CD83. Modification of the extraction protocol allowed a comparative analysis of exosome secretion under various conditions. Treatment of cells with calcium ionophore, or phorbol ester resulted in apparent increases in exosome release, while the phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase inhibitor, wortmannin, reduced exosome secretion. The immuno-magnetic isolation and analysis of exosomes is a versatile and rapid tool for the analysis of APC exosomes, and may prove a valuable tool for the study of exosome biology.11135724
Perioperative activation of hemostasis in vascular surgery patients.
Samama C M, Thiry D, Elalamy I, Diaby M, Guillosson J J, Kieffer E, Coriat P
Anesthesiology
Perioperative activation of hemostasis could play an important role in the occurrence of postoperative cardiac events. The authors conducted a prospective study to assess platelet function, coagulation, and fibrinolysis status during and after infrarenal aortic surgery.
Seventeen patients were studied. Excluded were patients with preoperative coagulopathies or liver disease, or cardiac or renal insufficiency; patients receiving anticoagulant treatment, antiplatelet agents, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, fresh frozen plasma, or platelet concentrates; and patients undergoing reoperation and septic patients. Blood samples were drawn before induction (T1), 1 h after incision (T2), 1 h after extubation (T3), 24 h postoperatively (T4), 48 h postoperatively (T5), and at day 7 (T6). The following tests were performed: platelet count, platelet aggregation, platelet flow cytometry for CD62 and CD63, usual coagulation tests, thrombin--antithrombin complexes, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1.
A significant increase of adenosine diphosphate--induced platelet aggregation was observed postoperatively at T4 and T5. This was not associated with a change of flow cytometry profile. No increase of thrombin--antithrombin complex levels was observed. A higher fibrinogen rate was detected at T5 and T6. Greater amounts of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 were detected at T3 and T4. Thus, thrombin generation was limited and fibrinolysis was impaired postoperatively. Platelets were not activated in the postoperative period, as shown by flow cytometry, but were prone to be activated, as shown by aggregation studies.
The association of more easily activated platelets with a higher fibrinogen rate and a temporary shut down of fibrinolysis during the early postoperative period may indicate an increased thrombotic risk in patients undergoing major vascular surgery.11113129
Evaluation of prototype transmembrane 4 superfamily protein complexes and their relation to lipid rafts.
Claas C, Stipp C S, Hemler M E
The Journal of biological chemistry
Recent literature suggests that tetraspanin proteins (transmembrane 4 superfamily; TM4SF proteins) may associate with each other and with many other transmembrane proteins to form large complexes that sometimes may be found in lipid rafts. Here we show that prototype complexes of CD9 or CD81 (TM4SF proteins) with alpha(3)beta(1) (an integrin) and complexes of CD63 (a TM4SF protein) with phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase (PtdIns 4-K) may indeed localize within lipid raft-like microdomains, as seen by three different criteria. First, these complexes localize to low density light membrane fractions in sucrose gradients. Second, CD9 and alpha(3) integrin colocalized with ganglioside GM1 as seen by double staining of fixed cells. Third, CD9-alpha3beta1 and CD81-alpha3beta1 complexes were shifted to a higher density upon cholesterol depletion from intact cells or cell lysate. However, CD9-alpha3beta1, CD81-alpha3beta1, and CD63-PtdIns 4-K complex formation itself was not dependent on localization into raftlike lipid microdomains. These complexes did not require cholesterol for stabilization, were maintained within well solubilized dense fractions from sucrose gradients, were stable at 37 degrees C, and were small enough to be included within CL6B gel filtration columns. In summary, prototype TM4SF protein complexes (CD9-alpha3beta1, CD81-alpha3beta1, and CD63-PtdIns 4-K) can be solubilized as discrete units, independent of lipid microdomains, although they do associate with microdomains resembling lipid rafts.